Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi (2019). "Clinical characteristics and risk factors of very low birth weight and extremely low birth weight infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia: multicenter retrospective analysis." Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi 57(1): 33-39.
	Objective: To analyze clinical characteristics and risk factors of very low birth weight and extremely low birth weight infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). Methods: A retrospective epidemiological study was performed in 768 neonates (376 males) with birth weights<1 500 g and gestational age ≤ 34 weeks who survived ≥28 days. Clinical data were obtained from the multi-center clinical database of neonatal intensive care units (NICU) in 19 hospitals of Jiangsu Province between January 1, 2017 and December 31, 2017. These infants were divided into non-BPD group and BPD group according to BPD diagnositic criteria. Clinical features and potential risk factors were compared between groups with Chi-square test or nonparametric test. Risk factors for BPD were analyzed with Logistic regression analysis. Results: Among the total of 768 eligible neonates, 577 without BPD, 191 with BPD (24.9%). Mild, moderate and severe BPD accounted for 73.3% (140/191), 23.6% (45/191) and 3.1% (6/191) of all BPD cases respectively. There were significant differences in the average gestational age (29 (28, 30) vs. 30 (29, 31) weeks) or the average birth weight (1 170 (990, 1 300) vs. 1 300 (1 160, 1 400) g) between BPD group and non-BPD group (Z=-9.959,-7.202, both P=0.000). The incidences of BPD in the infants with gestational age of<28 weeks, 28-31 weeks and 32-34 weeks were 51.7% (46/89), 24.8% (139/561), 5.1% (6/118) respectively. The incidences of BPD in infants with birth weight<1 000 g, 1 000- 1 249 g and 1 250-1 500 g were 62.3% (48/77), 25.9% (70/270) and 17.3% (73/421) respectively. Proportion of male (55.5% (106/191) vs. 46.8% (270/577)), rate and length of conventional mechanical ventilation (48.7% (93/191) vs. 14.9% (86/577), 120 (72, 259) vs. 80 (29, 144)h), initial inhaled oxygen concentration and maximum inhaled oxygen concentration (0.35 (0.30, 0.40) vs. 0.30(0.25, 0.40), 0.40 (0.30, 0.50) vs. 0.30 (0.30, 0.40)) and volume of red blood cell transfusion (53(30, 90) vs.38(28, 55) ml) were higher in BPD group than in non-BPD group (χ(2)=4.350, 91.640, Z=-3.557, -2.848, -3.776, -4.677, all P<0.05). Rate of continuous positive airway pressure (12.6%(24/191) vs. 19.4%(112/577)) during neonatal resuscitation in delivery room was lower in BPD group than that in non-BPD group (χ(2)=4.614, P=0.032). The incidences of complications in BPD group including severe asphyxia, neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (NRDS), persistent pulmonary hypertension in newborns (PPHN), patent ductus arteriosus, anemia of prematurity, early onset sepsis, clinical sepsis and ventilator associated pneumonia were higher than that in non-BPD group (15.2%(29/191) vs. 4.5% (26/577), 91.1% (174/191) vs. 56.7% (327/577), 2.6% (5/191) vs. 0.2% (1/577), 43.5% (83/191) vs. 34.2% (197/577), 88.0% (168/191) vs. 58.8% (339/577), 15.7% (30/191) vs. 9.9% (57/577), 42.9% (82/191) vs. 18.6% (107/577), 14.1% (27/191) vs. 2.3% (13/577); χ(2)=24.605, 74.993, 9.167, 5.373, 61.866, 4.557, 43.149, 34.315, all P<0.05). Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that NRDS (OR=4.651, 95%CI: 1.860-11.625), clinical sepsis (OR=1.989, 95%CI: 1.067-3.708), ventilator associated pneumonia (OR=3.155, 95%CI: 1.060-9.388), conventional mechanical ventilation (OR=2.298, 95%CI: 1.152-4.586), and volume of red blood cell transfusion (OR=1.013, 95%CI: 1.002-1.024) were risk factors of BPD. Conclusions: BPD is more common in very low birth weight infants of male with gestational age less than 32 weeks. Using CPAP in the delivery room, active treatment of NRDS, preventing nosocomial infection, and reducing invasive ventilation and red blood cell transfusion may decrease the incidence of BPD.

Abad, V. C. and C. Guilleminault (2003). "Diagnosis and treatment of sleep disorders: a brief review for clinicians." Dialogues Clin Neurosci 5(4): 371-388.
	Sleep disorders encompass a wide spectrum of diseases with significant individual health consequences and high economic costs to society. To facilitate the diagnosis and treatment of sleep disorders, this review provides a framework using the International Classification of Sleep Disorders, Primary and secondary insomnia are differentiated, and pharmacological and nonpharmacological treatments are discussed. Common circadian rhythm disorders are described in conjunction with interventions, including chronotherapy and light therapy. The diagnosis and treatment of restless legs syndrome/periodic limb movement disorder is addressed. Attention is focused on obstructive sleep apnea and upper airway resistance syndrome, and their treatment. The constellation of symptoms and findings in narcolepsy are reviewed together with diagnostic testing and therapy, Parasomnias, including sleep terrors, somnambulism, and rapid eye movement (REM) behavior sleep disorders are described, together with associated laboratory testing results and treatment.

Adhikari, P., et al. (2021). "Supplemental light exposure improves sleep architecture in people with type 2 diabetes." Acta Diabetol 58(9): 1201-1208.
	AIMS: People with type 2 diabetes (T2D) suffer from sleep disorders, with the mechanism not clearly understood. In T2D, the light transducing retinal photoreceptors that regulate sleep behaviours are dysfunctional; hence, we determine here whether supplemental light exposure ameliorates sleep quality and daytime sleepiness in T2D. METHODS: Supplemental light (10,000 Lux, polychromatic) was self-administered for 30 min every morning for 14 days by ten participants with T2D with no diabetic retinopathy (DR). The effectiveness of supplemental light was assessed by comparing subjective sleep questionnaire (PSQI and ESS) scores and salivary dim light melatonin onset (DLMO) before and after the light exposure as well as with a self-maintained sleep diary during the light exposure. RESULTS: Compared to the baseline, supplemental light significantly improved the excessive daytime sleepiness score (p = 0.004) and phase-advanced the DLMO on average by ~ 23 min. Sleep diary analyses showed that afternoon nap duration significantly shortened over the first week of supplemental light exposure (p = 0.019). Afternoon naps and midnight awakening were significantly longer in diabetic participants with thinner perifoveal retina. CONCLUSIONS: In this case series, we provide initial evidence that supplemental bright light improves daytime sleepiness in T2D with no DR, with the critical period of light exposure showing a beneficial effect after one week. We infer that supplemental light augments photoreceptor signalling in T2D and therefore optimises circadian photoentrainment leading to improved sleep. Our findings inform the development of tailored light therapy protocols in future clinical trials for improving sleep architecture in diabetes.

Altena, E., et al. (2008). "Sleep loss affects vigilance: effects of chronic insomnia and sleep therapy." J Sleep Res 17(3): 335-343.
	Although complaints of impaired daytime functioning are essential to the diagnosis of primary insomnia, objective evidence for cognitive dysfunction has been hard to establish. A prerequisite for understanding the neurocognitive consequences of primary insomnia is to establish task paradigms that robustly differentiate insomniacs from well-sleeping subjects. We hypothesized that the decline in performance that typically occurs with an increasing cognitive demand would provide a more sensitive measure than performance on a single task version. The hypothesis was tested, first, by assessing the performance on two vigilance tasks with different cognitive demands in 25 elderly patients with primary insomnia and 13 healthy well-sleeping age-matched subjects. Secondly, we investigated the performance response to sleep therapy using a waiting-list controlled design. Sleep therapy consisted of a multi-component intervention including sleep restriction, cognitive behavioral therapy, bright-light therapy, structured physical activity and body temperature manipulations. The results show that insomniacs differed markedly from controls in their reaction times across tasks with different cognitive demands: patients responded faster on the 'simple' vigilance task, yet slower on the 'complex' vigilance task. Sleep therapy effectively restored normal performance: patients became significantly slower on the 'simple' task and faster on the 'complex' task, returning to the performance levels of control subjects. These findings indicate that the performance decline associated with increasing cognitive demands is possibly the first sensitive and robust measure of the neurocognitive sequelae of insomnia. We suggest that future studies on cognition in primary insomnia should apply a design that varies task demands.

Amara, A. W., et al. (2017). "Treatment of Sleep Dysfunction in Parkinson's Disease." Curr Treat Options Neurol 19(7): 26.
	Impaired sleep and alertness affect the majority of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients, negatively impacting safety and quality of life. The etiology of impaired sleep-wake cycle in PD is multifactorial and encompasses medication side effects, nocturnal PD motor symptoms, and presence of co-existent sleep and neuropsychiatric disorders. The primary neurodegenerative process of PD involves brain regions that regulate the sleep-wake cycle, such as brainstem and hypothalamic nuclei. Sleep disorders in PD include insomnia, REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD), sleep disordered breathing (SDB), restless legs syndrome (RLS), and circadian disruption. Despite its high prevalence in the PD population, there is a paucity of clinical studies that have investigated treatment of sleep dysfunction associated with PD. Therefore, we aim to review available evidence and outline treatment strategies for improvement of disorders of sleep and wakefulness in PD patients. Evidence supporting the efficacy of pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment strategies in PD is limited. There is thus a great need but also opportunity for development of well-designed clinical trials for impaired sleep and alertness in PD. Providing education about sleep hygiene and strategies for its implementation represents the initial step in management. Prompt diagnosis and treatment of co-existent primary sleep and psychiatric disorders are critical, as this may significantly improve sleep and alertness. While the optimal treatment for insomnia in PD has not been established, available strategies include cognitive-behavioral therapy, medications with soporific properties, and light therapy. Safety measures, clonazepam, and melatonin are the mainstay of treatment for RBD. Continuous positive airway pressure is an effective treatment for SDB in PD. The treatment algorithm for RLS associated with PD mirrors that used for idiopathic RLS. Circadian disruption has emerged as an important etiology of impaired sleep-wake cycles in PD, and circadian-based interventions hold promise for novel treatment approaches.

Ancoli-Israel, S., et al. (2003). "The role of actigraphy in the study of sleep and circadian rhythms." Sleep 26(3): 342-392.
	In summary, although actigraphy is not as accurate as PSG for determining some sleep measurements, studies are in general agreement that actigraphy, with its ability to record continuously for long time periods, is more reliable than sleep logs which rely on the patients' recall of how many times they woke up or how long they slept during the night and is more reliable than observations which only capture short time periods. Actigraphy can provide information obtainable in no other practical way. It can also have a role in the medical care of patients with sleep disorders. However, it should not be held to the same expectations as polysomnography. Actigraphy is one-dimensional, whereas polysomnography comprises at least 3 distinct types of data (EEG, EOG, EMG), which jointly determine whether a person is asleep or awake. It is therefore doubtful whether actigraphic data will ever be informationally equivalent to the PSG, although progress on hardware and data processing software is continuously being made. Although the 1995 practice parameters paper determined that actigraphy was not appropriate for the diagnosis of sleep disorders, more recent studies suggest that for some disorders, actigraphy may be more practical than PSG. While actigraphy is still not appropriate for the diagnosis of sleep disordered breathing or of periodic limb movements in sleep, it is highly appropriate for examining the sleep variability (i.e., night-to-night variability) in patients with insomnia. Actigraphy is also appropriate for the assessment of and stability of treatment effects of anything from hypnotic drugs to light treatment to CPAP, particularly if assessments are done before and after the start of treatment. A recent independent review of the actigraphy literature by Sadeh and Acebo reached many of these same conclusions. Some of the research studies failed to find relationships between sleep measures and health-related symptoms. The interpretation of these data is also not clear-cut. Is it that the actigraph is not reliable enough to the access the relationship between sleep changes and quality of life measures, or, is it that, in fact, there is no relationship between sleep in that population and quality of life measures? Other studies of sleep disordered breathing, where actigraphy was not used and was not an outcome measure also failed to find any relationship with quality of life. Is it then the actigraph that is not reliable or that the associations just do not exist? The one area where actigraphy can be used for clinical diagnosis is in the evaluation of circadian rhythm disorders. Actigraphy has been shown to be very good for identifying rhythms. Results of actigraphic recordings correlate well with measurements of melatonin and of core body temperature rhythms. Activity records also show sleep disturbance when sleep is attempted at an unfavorable phase of the circadian cycle. Actigraphy therefore would be particularly good for aiding in the diagnosis of delayed or advanced sleep phase syndrome, non-24-hour-sleep syndrome and in the evaluation of sleep disturbances in shift workers. It must be remembered, however, that overt rest-activity rhythms are susceptible to various masking effects, so they may not always show the underlying rhythm of the endogenous circadian pacemaker. In conclusion, the latest set of research articles suggest that in the clinical setting, actigraphy is reliable for evaluating sleep patterns in patients with insomnia, for studying the effect of treatments designed to improve sleep, in the diagnosis of circadian rhythm disorders (including shift work), and in evaluating sleep in individuals who are less likely to tolerate PSG, such as infants and demented elderly. While actigraphy has been used in research studies for many years, up to now, methodological issues had not been systematically addressed in clinical research and practice. Those issues have now been addressed and actigraphy may now be reaching the maturity needed for application in the clinical arena.

Ancoli-Israel, S., et al. (2002). "Effect of light treatment on sleep and circadian rhythms in demented nursing home patients." J Am Geriatr Soc 50(2): 282-289.
	OBJECTIVES: To determine whether fragmented sleep in nursing home patients would improve with increased exposure to bright light. DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial. SETTING: Two San Diego-area nursing homes. PARTICIPANTS: Seventy-seven (58 women, 19 men) nursing home residents participated. Mean age +/- standard deviation was 85.7 +/- 7.3 (range 60-100) and mean Mini-Mental State Examination was 12.8 +/- 8.8 (range 0-30). INTERVENTIONS: Participants were assigned to one of four treatments: evening bright light, morning bright light, daytime sleep restriction, or evening dim red light. MEASUREMENTS: Improvement in nighttime sleep quality, daytime alertness, and circadian activity rhythm parameters. RESULTS: There were no improvements in nighttime sleep or daytime alertness in any of the treatment groups. Morning bright light delayed the peak of the activity rhythm (acrophase) and increased the mean activity level (mesor). In addition, subjects in the morning bright light group had improved activity rhythmicity during the 10 days of treatment. CONCLUSION: Increasing exposure to morning bright light delayed the acrophase of the activity rhythm and made the circadian rhythm more robust. These changes have the potential to be clinically beneficial because it may be easier to provide nursing care to patients whose circadian activity patterns are more socially acceptable.

Anderson, J. L., et al. (1994). "Sleep in fall/winter seasonal affective disorder: effects of light and changing seasons." J Psychosom Res 38(4): 323-337.
	Disturbances of sleep are a hallmark of seasonal affective disorders (SAD), as they are of other mood disorders. Fall/winter SAD patients most often report hypersomnia. Among responses of 293 SAD patients on a symptom questionnaire, complaints of winter hypersomnia (80%) greatly exceeded insomnia (10%), hypersomnia plus insomnia (5%), or no sleep difficulty (5%). Increased sleep length in fall/winter is not unique to SAD. Among 1571 individuals across four latitudes surveyed at random from the general population, winter sleep increases of < or = 2 hr/day relative to summer were reported by nearly half. However, hypersomnia had a low correlation (r = 0.29) with the total number of other SAD symptoms that were reported in this sample. Ten SAD patients kept daily sleep logs across 1 yr that showed increases in fall and winter (sleeping most in October; least in May) whose maximum averaged 2.7 hr per day more weekend sleep than in spring and summer. These winter increases might have been somewhat attenuated since most received light therapy during part of the winter. Nocturnal EEG recordings of depressed SAD patients in winter showed decreased sleep efficiency, decreased delta sleep percentage, and increased REM density (but normal REM latency) in comparison with recordings: (1) from themselves in summer; (2) from themselves after > or = 9 days of light therapy; or (3) from age- and gender-matched healthy controls. Thus, the extent of fall/winter oversleeping recorded by our SAD patients did not differ dramatically from that reported by the general population, but sleep complaints of our SAD patients have been accompanied by features of sleep architecture that are different from healthy controls and are reversed by summer or by bright-light therapy.

Andrade, A., et al. (2020). "Interventions for chronic pruritus of unknown origin." Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1(1): Cd013128.
	BACKGROUND: Pruritus is a sensation that leads to the desire to scratch; its origin is unknown in 8% to 15% of affected patients. The prevalence of chronic pruritus of unknown origin (CPUO) in individuals with generalised pruritus ranges from 3.6% to 44.5%, with highest prevalence among the elderly. When the origin of pruritus is known, its management may be straightforward if an effective treatment for the causal disease is available. Treatment of CPUO is particularly difficult due to its unknown pathophysiology. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of interventions for CPUO in adults and children. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following up to July 2019: Cochrane Skin Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, and trials registries. We checked the reference lists of included studies for additional references to relevant trials. SELECTION CRITERIA: We sought to include randomised controlled trials and quasi-randomised controlled trials that assessed interventions for CPUO, as defined in category VI ('Other pruritus of undetermined origin, or chronic pruritus of unknown origin') of the International Forum for the Study of Itch (IFSI) classification, in children and adults. Eligible interventions were non-pharmacological or topical or systemic pharmacological interventions, and eligible comparators were another active treatment, placebo, sham procedures, or no treatment or equivalent (e.g. waiting list). DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures expected by Cochrane. Our primary outcomes were 'Patient- or parent-reported pruritus intensity' and 'Adverse events'. Our secondary outcomes were 'Health-related quality of life', 'Sleep disturbances', 'Depression', and 'Patient satisfaction'. We used GRADE to assess the certainty of evidence. MAIN RESULTS: We found there was an absence of evidence for the main interventions of interest: emollient creams, cooling lotions, topical corticosteroids, topical antidepressants, systemic antihistamines, systemic antidepressants, systemic anticonvulsants, and phototherapy. We included one study with 257 randomised (253 analysed) participants, aged 18 to 65 years; 60.6% were female. This study investigated the safety and efficacy of three different doses of oral serlopitant (5 mg, 1 mg, and 0.25 mg, once daily for six weeks) compared to placebo for severe chronic pruritus; 25 US centres participated (clinical research centres and universities). All outcomes were measured at the end of treatment (six weeks from baseline), except adverse events, which were monitored throughout. A pharmaceutical company funded this study. Fifty-five per cent of participants suffered from CPUO, and approximately 45% presented a dermatological diagnosis (atopic dermatitis/eczema 37.3%, psoriasis 6.7%, acne 3.6%, among other diagnoses). We unsuccessfully attempted to retrieve outcome data from study authors for the subgroup of participants with CPUO. Participants had pruritus for six weeks or longer. Total study duration was 10 weeks. Participants who received serlopitant 5 mg may have a greater rate of relief of patient-reported pruritus intensity as measured by the visual analogue scale (VAS; a reduction in VAS score indicates improvement) compared to placebo (126 participants, risk ratio (RR) 2.06, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.27 to 3.35; low-certainty evidence). We are uncertain of the effects of serlopitant 5 mg compared to placebo on the following outcomes due to very low-certainty evidence: adverse events (127 participants; RR 1.48, 95% CI 0.87 to 2.50); health-related quality of life (as measured by the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI); a higher score indicates greater impairment; 127 participants; mean difference (MD) -4.20, 95% CI -11.68 to 3.28); and sleep disturbances (people with insomnia measured by the Pittsburgh Sleep Symptom Questionnaire-Insomnia (PSSQ-I), a dichotomous measure; 128 participants; RR 0.49, 95% CI 0.24 to 1.01). Participants who received serlopitant 1 mg may have a greater rate of relief of patient-reported pruritus intensity as measured by VAS compared to placebo; however, the 95% CI indicates that there may also be little to no difference between groups (126 participants; RR 1.50, 95% CI 0.89 to 2.54; low-certainty evidence). We are uncertain of the effects of serlopitant 1 mg compared to placebo on the following outcomes due to very low-certainty evidence: adverse events (128 participants; RR 1.45, 95% CI 0.86 to 2.47); health-related quality of life (DLQI; 128 participants; MD -6.90, 95% CI -14.38 to 0.58); and sleep disturbances (PSSQ-I; 128 participants; RR 0.38, 95% CI 0.17 to 0.84). Participants who received serlopitant 0.25 mg may have a greater rate of relief of patient-reported pruritus intensity as measured by VAS compared to placebo; however, the 95% CI indicates that there may also be little to no difference between groups (127 participants; RR 1.66, 95% CI 1.00 to 2.77; low-certainty evidence). We are uncertain of the effects of serlopitant 0.25 mg compared to placebo on the following outcomes due to very low-certainty evidence: adverse events (127 participants; RR 1.29, 95% CI 0.75 to 2.24); health-related quality of life (DLQI; 127 participants; MD -5.70, 95% CI -13.18 to 1.78); and sleep disturbances (PSSQ-I; 127 participants; RR 0.60, 95% CI 0.31 to 1.17). The most commonly reported adverse events were somnolence, diarrhoea, headache, and nasopharyngitis, among others. Our included study did not measure depression or patient satisfaction. We downgraded the certainty of evidence for all outcomes due to indirectness (only 55% of study participants had CPUO) and imprecision. We downgraded outcomes other than patient-reported pruritus intensity a further level due to concerns regarding risk of bias in selection of the reported result and some concerns with risk of bias due to missing outcome data (sleep disturbances only). We deemed risk of bias to be generally low. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We found lack of evidence to address our review question: for most of our interventions of interest, we found no eligible studies. The neurokinin 1 receptor (NK1R) antagonist serlopitant was the only intervention that we could assess. One study provided low-certainty evidence suggesting that serlopitant may reduce pruritus intensity when compared with placebo. We are uncertain of the effects of serlopitant on other outcomes, as certainty of the evidence is very low. More studies with larger sample sizes, focused on patients with CPUO, are needed. Healthcare professionals, patients, and other stakeholders may have to rely on indirect evidence related to other forms of chronic pruritus when deciding between the main interventions currently used for this condition.

Asplund, R. (1999). "Sleep disorders in the elderly." Drugs Aging 14(2): 91-103.
	Sleep is important for health and quality of life at all ages, and poor sleep interacts with many medical conditions. Somatic and psychiatric diseases, and unfavourable habits and life-style factors, increase the propensity to insomnia in older persons. As health deteriorates with age, sleep becomes poorer. Heart disease and stroke, cancer, painful conditions, breathing disorders and nocturnal polyuria syndrome often disturb sleep. Dementia and depression, which are often associated with sleep disturbances, are also more prevalent in the elderly. Moreover, true age-related sleep deterioration occurs after the age of 75 years. Attempts to improve sleep should first and foremost be focused on elimination of somatic and psychiatric symptoms as far as possible, and on modification of lifestyle factors that may affect sleep quality. For short term treatment, hypnotics are appropriate; for longer periods, nonpharmacological methods, for example light therapy or behavioural modification techniques, should be considered, as many hypnotic drugs are less suitable for long term use. However, there are situations when sleep medication must continue for long periods, especially in elderly patients with severe diseases and poor quality of life. In these patients, careful individualisation of therapy is appropriate.

Ayaki, M., et al. (2016). "Preliminary report of improved sleep quality in patients with dry eye disease after initiation of topical therapy." Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 12: 329-337.
	PURPOSE: Dry eye disease (DED) is potentially associated with sleep and mood disorders. This study evaluated sleep quality in patients with DED using a questionnaire-based survey before and after topical eyedrop treatment. The effectiveness of sleep and ophthalmic services in assisting with sleep problems in patients with eye disease was also assessed. METHODS: Seventy-one consecutive patients with DED visiting eight general eye clinics in various locations answered a questionnaire containing the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale. Photophobia and chronotype (morningness/eveningness) were also evaluated with two representative questions from established questionnaires (National Eye Institute Visual Function Questionnaire-25 and Morningness/Eveningness questionnaire). Follow-up evaluation was conducted by interview or mail 3-10 months after the initial evaluation. A sleep service was established in two eye clinics to identify possible ocular diseases related to sleep and mood disorders; it comprised a questionnaire, sleep diary, actigram, medical interviews, visual field testing, retinal ganglion cell layer thickness measurement, and DED examination. RESULTS: Patients with newly diagnosed DED exhibited a greater improvement in sleep after DED treatment compared with patients with established DED. Improvement in Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index was significant (P<0.05) and strongly correlated with improvement in Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (P<0.05) for new patients, but not for patients with established DED. Ten eye clinic patients visited the sleep service and nine of them had DED. They were successfully treated with eyedrops and sleep services, which included blue-light-shield eyewear and wearable blue-light therapy lamps according to their problem. CONCLUSION: Sleep quality improved in patients with DED after topical treatment with or without the sleep service. Psychiatric treatment focusing on sleep disorders could be beneficial for patients with DED.

Baillargeon, L. (1997). "[Behavior and cognitive treatments for insomnia. An alternative to pharmacotherapy]." Can Fam Physician 43: 290-296.
	OBJECTIVE: To familiarize family physicians with cognitive and behavioural treatments for insomnia. DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE was searched from 1983 to 1995 and Psychlit from 1974 to 1995 using the key words "behaviour therapy," "cognitive therapy," "phototherapy," and "insomnia." STUDY SELECTION: We chose randomized trials and meta-analyses on the treatment of insomnia. Information was extracted on time-lag before sleep, frequency and duration of wakeful periods during the night, consumption of hynotics, and subjects' own assessment of their sleep before and after treatment. SYNTHESIS: The most effective interventions were relaxation training, sleep restriction, and stimulus control. Practising good sleeping habits was only somewhat effective and should always be used in conjunction with other interventions. CONCLUSION: Stimulus control for insomnia has been demonstrated to be effective when used by primary care physicians. Other nonpharmacologic treatments should be evaluated in a similar manner.
eng

Bais, B., et al. (2016). "Bright light therapy in pregnant women with major depressive disorder: study protocol for a randomized, double-blind, controlled clinical trial." BMC Psychiatry 16(1): 381.
	BACKGROUND: Depression during pregnancy is a common and high impact disease. Generally, 5-10 % of pregnant women suffer from depression. Children who have been exposed to maternal depression during pregnancy have a higher risk of adverse birth outcomes and more often show cognitive, emotional and behavioural problems. Therefore, early detection and treatment of antepartum depression is necessary. Both psychotherapy and antidepressant medication, first choice treatments in a non-pregnant population, have limitations in treating depression during pregnancy. Therefore, it is urgent and relevant to investigate alternative treatments for antepartum depression. Bright light therapy (BLT) is a promising treatment for pregnant women with depressive disorder, for it combines direct availability, sufficient efficacy, low costs and high safety, taking the safety for the unborn child into account as well. METHODS: In this study, 150 pregnant women (12-18 weeks pregnant) with a DSM-V diagnosis of depressive disorder will be randomly allocated in a 1:1 ratio to one of the two treatment arms: treatment with BLT (9.000 lux) or treatment with dim red light therapy (100 lux). Both groups will be treated for 6 weeks at home on a daily basis for 30 min, within 30 min of habitual wake-up time. Follow-up will take place after 6 weeks of therapy, 3 and 10 weeks after end of therapy, at birth and 2, 6 and 18 months postpartum. Primary outcome will be the average change in depressive symptoms between the two groups, as measured by the Structured Interview Guide for the Hamilton Depression Scale - Seasonal Affective Disorder version and the Edinburg Postnatal Depression Scale. Changes in rating scale scores of these questionnaires over time will be analysed using generalized linear mixed models. Secondary outcomes will be the changes in maternal cortisol and melatonin levels, in maternal sleep quality and gestational age, birth weight, infant behaviour, infant cortisol exposure and infant cortisol stress response. DISCUSSION: If BLT reduces depressive symptoms in pregnant women, it will provide a safe, cheap, non-pharmacological and efficacious alternative treatment for psychotherapy and antidepressant medication in treating antepartum depression, without any expected adverse reactions for the unborn child. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Netherlands Trial Register NTR5476 . Registered 5 November 2015.

Barthlen, G. M. and C. Stacy (1994). "Dyssomnias, parasomnias, and sleep disorders associated with medical and psychiatric diseases." Mt Sinai J Med 61(2): 139-159.
	Sleep disorders can be intrinsic, as are insomnia or narcolepsy, or can be accounted for by external factors, such as noise, altitude, drug or alcohol abuse, or shift work. The arousal disorders, common in children, are usually benign and disappear by puberty. Sleep-wake transition disorders such as sleep starts are benign as well, and may occur at any age. The parasomnias comprise different entities such as nightmares, REM-sleep behavior disorder, sleep enuresis, and bruxism. Diagnosis and treatment often require a multidisciplinary approach. Virtually every psychiatric, neurologic, or medical disease, when of sufficient severity, leaves its specific fingerprint on sleep; some disorders, such as peptic ulcer disease, gastroesophageal reflux, or epilepsy, tend to be exacerbated during sleep. Fortunately, most sleep disorders are amenable to therapy, which can include counseling, sleep hygiene, withholding of an offending agent, behavioral therapy, light therapy, or cautious drug therapy.

Bartlett, D. J., et al. (2013). "Circadian rhythm disorders among adolescents: assessment and treatment options." Med J Aust 199(8): S16-20.
	Delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD) - a circadian rhythm sleep disorder - is most commonly seen in adolescents. The differential diagnosis between DSPD and conventional psychophysiological insomnia is important for correct therapeutic intervention. Adolescent DSPD sleep duration is commonly 9 hours or more. Depression may be comorbid with DSPD. DSPD has a negative impact on adolescent academic performance. DSPD treatments include bright light therapy, chronotherapeutic regimens, and administration of melatonin as a chronobiotic (as distinct from a soporific). Attention to non-photic and extrinsic factors including healthy sleep parameters is also important to enable better sleep and mood outcomes in adolescents.

Baumgartel, K. and F. Facco (2018). "An Integrative Review of the Sleep Experiences of Mothers of Hospitalized Preterm Infants." Nurs Womens Health 22(4): 310-326.
	OBJECTIVE: To determine what is known about the sleep experiences of mothers of hospitalized preterm infants. DATA SOURCES: A literature search of PubMed and CINAHL was performed in February 2018. Additional articles were identified from reference lists. STUDY SELECTION: Whittemore's integrative review methodology was used to synthesize existing literature; 17 articles met eligibility criteria. DATA EXTRACTION: Data were reported in tabular format, including subjects, purpose, setting, interventions, sleep measurements, psychometric instruments, analyses, and results. DATA SYNTHESIS: Overall, sleep is disrupted and of poor quality, and many mothers report insomnia with less total sleep time. Potential beneficial interventions include bright light therapy, relaxation guided imagery, and progressive muscle relaxation. CONCLUSION: Although some interventions show promise, there are significant limitations. Future research should consider maternal/infant separation and milk expression.

Bean, H. R., et al. (2022). "Light enhanced cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia and fatigue during chemotherapy for breast cancer: a randomized controlled trial." Sleep 45(3).
	STUDY OBJECTIVES: Sleep problems are common during chemotherapy for breast cancer (BC). We evaluated whether combined brief cognitive behavioral and bright light therapy (CBT-I + Light) is superior to treatment as usual with relaxation audio (TAU+) for insomnia symptoms and sleep efficiency (primary outcomes). METHODS: We randomized women receiving intravenous chemotherapy, stratified by tumor stage and insomnia severity index, to 6-week CBT-I + Light or TAU+. CBT-I + Light included 1 in-person session, 1 telephone call, 7 emails, and 20 min bright light (BL) each morning. TAU+ comprised usual treatment and two emails with relaxation audio tracks. Patient-reported outcomes were assessed at baseline, midpoint (week 3), post (week 6), and 3-month follow-up. RESULTS: Women (N = 101) were randomly assigned to CBT-I + Light or TAU+. The CBT-I + Light group showed significantly greater improvement in insomnia symptoms than the TAU+ group (-5.06 vs -1.93, p = .009; between-group effect size [ES] = .69). At 3-month follow-up, both groups were lower than baseline but did not differ from each other (between-group ES = .18, p = .56). CBT-I + Light had higher patient-reported sleep efficiency than TAU+ immediately after the start of intervention (p = .05) and significantly greater improvement in fatigue (between-group ES = .59, p = .013) and daytime sleep-related impairment (between-group ES = .61, p = .009) than the TAU+ group. CONCLUSIONS: CBT-I + Light had a clinically significant impact on insomnia and fatigue with moderate ESs. Results support offering cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia and BL therapy during chemotherapy for BC to help manage sleep and fatigue. CLINICAL TRIAL: Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (http://anzctr.org.au/). Registration number: ACTRN12618001255279.

Bean, H. R., et al. (2020). "Light-enhanced cognitive behavioural therapy for sleep and fatigue: study protocol for a randomised controlled trial during chemotherapy for breast cancer." Trials 21(1): 295.
	BACKGROUND: Women with breast cancer experience a significantly higher prevalence of sleep disturbance and insomnia than the general population. The experience of persistent sleep disturbance places these women at a higher risk of psychological and physical morbidity and a reduced quality of life. Treatment for sleep in this population is not part of routine care and is often managed inadequately. This randomised controlled trial will examine the combined effects of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and bright light therapy (BLT) on the symptoms of insomnia, fatigue and mental health. METHOD/DESIGN: Women diagnosed with breast cancer who receive intravenous chemotherapy treatment at a quaternary referral metropolitan cancer centre in Melbourne, Australia, will be recruited. Recruitment will occur after diagnosis and prior to completion of chemotherapy. Eligible women will be randomised to the combined CBT and BLT intervention (CBT+) or relaxation audio-enhanced treatment as usual (TAU+). The CBT+ group will receive one face-to-face session on sleep strategies, one subsequent telephone call, and seven email packages containing CBT-based information and strategies. CBT+ participants will also wear Luminette® light glasses for 20 min each morning for the 6-week duration of the intervention. Women in TAU+ will receive two relaxation audio tracks via email. Outcomes will be measured at multiple points throughout the 6 weeks. Primary outcomes will be symptoms of insomnia and sleep efficiency, measured using the Insomnia Severity Index and a self-reported sleep diary. Secondary outcomes include objective measures of sleep assessed using the ActiGraph wGT3X-BT, and sleep-related complaints, fatigue and mental health, all assessed using the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS). Data will also be collected on potential treatment moderators and mechanisms and adherence to treatment. There will be 3-month follow-up measurements of insomnia symptoms, fatigue, sleep-related impairment, sleep disturbance, depression and anxiety. DISCUSSION: This is the first randomised controlled trial to combine CBT and BLT for the treatment of sleep disturbance in women with breast cancer. This novel design addresses the multiple causal factors for sleep complaints in this population. Results from this trial will advance knowledge in this field and may have important clinical implications for how best to treat sleep disturbance and insomnia in this population. If effective, the largely email-based format of the intervention would allow for relatively easy translation. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ANZCTR), ACTRN12618001255279. Retrospectively registered on 25 July 2018.

Bell, K. R., et al. (2021). "The effect of phototherapy on sleep during acute rehabilitation after traumatic brain injury: a randomized controlled trial." Brain Inj 35(2): 180-188.
	Objective: To examine the impact of bright white light (BWL) exposure on sleep quality in persons with recent traumatic brain injury (TBI).Design: Randomized, controlled device-sham studySetting: 3 TBI Model System inpatient rehabilitation unitsParticipants: 131 participants (mean 40.9 years, 68% male)Intervention: Intervention group (N = 65) received BWL (1260 lux at 20 inches, 440-480 nanometers length) for 30 minutes each morning at 12-24 inches from the face. Control group (N = 66) received red light (<450 lux, no light between 440 and 480 nanometers) for the same period. Planned intervention was maximum of 10 treatments or until discharge.Main Outcome Measure: Sleep duration and quality using actigraphic recording.Results: There were no differences found between groups on the primary outcomes nor on the secondary outcomes (sleepiness, mood, cooperation with therapy).Conclusion: BWL treatment during acute rehabilitation hospitalization does not appear to impact sleep or measures commonly associated with sleep. While studies have indicated common complaints of sleep difficulties after TBI, we were unable to document an effect for phototherapy as a treatment. With growing evidence of the effect of sleep on neural repair and cognition, further study is needed to understand the nature and treatment of sleep disorders after TBI.Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT02214212.

Beullens, J. and J. Schols (2002). "[Treatment of insomnia in demented nursing home patients: a review]." Tijdschr Gerontol Geriatr 33(1): 15-20.
	Insomnia and fragmentation are features of the sleep of these patients. In order to list the factors disturbing the sleep of demented nursing home patients and the interventions improving their sleep quality, the literature was reviewed. A Medline search over the period 1966-2000 was performed. This resulted in 22 research articles. Admission to a nursing home is associated with sleep disturbances caused by patient problems (e.g. pain), care routines (e.g. nightly nursing round) and environment (e.g. noise). There are indications that the use of hypnotics in nursing home patients is not always effective and increases the risk of falls. There are several ways to reduce hypnotic consumption in nursing homes. Non-pharmacological interventions to decrease sleep disturbances caused by environmental factors have a favourable although weak effect on sleep itself. By reducing nightly noise, sleep quality does not necessarily improve. Light therapy seems to be the most effective non-pharmacological method to strengthen the circadian sleep/wake rhythm. The struggle against insomnia without using medication perhaps requires a two tracks management: detection and elimination of disturbing environmental factors and implementation of an adequate method to strengthen the circadian sleep/wake rhythm.

Bisdounis, L., et al. (2022). "Psychological and behavioural interventions in bipolar disorder that target sleep and circadian rhythms: A systematic review of randomised controlled trials." Neurosci Biobehav Rev 132: 378-390.
	Sleep and circadian disruptions are prominent symptoms of bipolar disorder (BD) and potential targets for adjunctive interventions. The aim of this review was to appraise the effectiveness of psychological and behavioural interventions in BD that target sleep and circadian rhythms, as reported by randomised controlled trials. Nineteen studies met the inclusion/exclusion criteria. They were summarised via narrative synthesis and meta-analysis wherever appropriate. Six studies delivered bright light therapy, five interpersonal and social rhythm therapy, two blue-light blocking glasses, one cognitive behavioural therapy for insomnia, one total sleep deprivation, and four combination treatments. More than half of the studies (N = 10, 52 %) did not measure sleep or circadian rhythms despite being the principal target of the intervention. Overall, the evidence base for the effectiveness of these interventions was limited. There was a small number of studies for each intervention, and a lack of consistency in protocols and outcomes. Meta-analysis was possible for the effect of bright light therapy on depression, revealing a medium-to-large post-treatment effect (Nc = 6; g=-0.74 [95 % CI=-1.05 to -0.42], p < 0.001).

Bishnoi, A., et al. (2021). "Oral mycophenolate mofetil as a stabilizing treatment for progressive non-segmental vitiligo: results from a prospective, randomized, investigator-blinded pilot study." Arch Dermatol Res 313(5): 357-365.
	Dexamethasone oral mini-pulse (OMP) is commonly used to halt progression of non-segmental vitiligo (NSV). There is an unmet need for non-phototherapy, non-corticosteroid therapeutic options for stabilizing actively spreading NSV. To assess the efficacy of oral mycophenolate mofetil in stabilizing active NSV in comparison to OMP. In this prospective, randomized, investigator-blinded study, 50 patients of active vitiligo [baseline vitiligo disease activity (VIDA) score 4] were randomized into two groups in 1:1 ratio. Group A received oral dexamethasone (2.5 mg on two successive days a week) and group B received mycophenolate mofetil (up to 2 g) for 180 days with a treatment-free follow-up period of 90 days. Assessment was done using VIDA, number of new lesions in past 30 days, and Vitiligo Area Scoring Index (VASI). Arrest of disease progression was defined as the absence of any new lesions in past 30 days. Twenty-five patients received OMP (group A, 11 males, 14 females), and 25 received mycophenolate (group B, 12 males, 13 females). In both groups, Kruskal-Wallis revealed a significant trend for reduction in VIDA and the number of new lesions in last 30 days, over the treatment and follow-up duration when compared to baseline (p < 0.001). The first significant reduction in VIDA was noticed on 90th day in groups A and B (p < 0.001). In both groups, VIDA reduced significantly at the 180th day compared to baseline (p < 0.001, WMP), only to increase significantly at the 270th day (p < 0.001, WMP). VIDA in group B was marginally higher at 270 days than group A (p 0.03; Mann-Whitney). Eighteen and 17 patients achieved VIDA 2 + on the 180th day in groups A and B, respectively. The mean number of new lesions in last 30 days reduced significantly in both groups at the 180th day (p < 0.001) and 270th day [p < 0.001; Wilcoxon matched pairs (WMP)] when compared to baseline; but increased significantly at the 270th day compared to the 180th day (p 0.006 WMP). Twenty patients in group A and 18 patients in group B had arrest of the disease activity with treatment. Mean duration to arrest disease progression was 47.2 ± 12.1 days in group A, and 52.5 ± 9.3 days in group B; p 0.21. The difference between VASI at baseline and VASI at the 180 and 270th days was non-significant in both groups (p 0.18 WMP). Five patients in each group failed the respective treatments. Acne (n = 3), weight gain (n = 3), headache, insomnia and menstrual irregularity (n = 1 each) were the important adverse effects noted with dexamethasone pulse; whereas nausea (n = 6) and diarrhea (n = 4) were the commonest adverse effects noted with mycophenolate. Two patients in group B discontinued treatment because of leucopenia (n = 1) and transaminitis (n = 1) that resolved after the discontinuation of mycophenolate. Both OMP and mycophenolate mofetil halt actively spreading vitiligo, and have distinct adverse effect profiles. These should be offered in progressive vitiligo, especially in circumstances precluding the use of phototherapy. Relapse occurred significantly earlier with mycophenolate, and relapse rate was higher (though non-significant) than dexamethasone OMP. The repigmentation potential is minimal for both therapies. This study was approved by Institute Ethics Committee, and retrospectively registered with clinical trial registry of India (CTRI/2018/02/011,664).

Bogdanov, S., et al. (2017). "Sleep outcomes following sleep-hygiene-related interventions for individuals with traumatic brain injury: A systematic review." Brain Inj 31(4): 422-433.
	BACKGROUND: Sleep disturbance is commonly reported following traumatic brain injury (TBI) and can adversely impact health and wellbeing and interfere with the rehabilitation process. As such, effective treatment of sleep disturbance is critical for overall recovery. Sleep hygiene, which is non-invasive, low cost, and low risk, could serve as a suitable first line of treatment for individuals experiencing sleep disturbance post-TBI. OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy of sleep hygiene on sleep outcomes post-TBI. DESIGN: PsycINFO, Medline and EMBASE databases were systematically searched using mesh terms and keywords related to 'traumatic brain injury', 'sleep' and 'treatment'. Studies that met inclusion criteria were assessed on their methodological quality using validated assessment tools. RESULTS: Ten studies met inclusion criteria, none of which contained a child or adolescent population. Their methodological quality varied. The following interventions were shown to improve sleep outcomes amongst adults with TBI: Cognitive Behaviour Therapy for Insomnia, blue light therapy, Problem Solving Treatment and combined sleep hygiene and Prazosin. There was mixed evidence for the efficacy of exercise on sleep outcomes. CONCLUSION: Preliminary findings suggest that some sleep-hygiene-related interventions, either in isolation or in combination with other treatments, may reduce sleep difficulties post-TBI.

Bootzin, R. R. and M. L. Perlis (1992). "Nonpharmacologic treatments of insomnia." J Clin Psychiatry 53 Suppl: 37-41.
	Nonpharmacologic treatments that have been evaluated for insomnia are reviewed. These include sleep hygiene techniques, stimulus control instructions, sleep restriction, chronotherapy, bright light therapy, relaxation training, biofeedback, paradoxical intention, and cognitive therapy. Comparative studies of the different treatments indicate considerable overlap in effectiveness. Direct comparisons between treatments have shown stimulus control instructions to be more effective than either relaxation training or paradoxical intention. Further research is needed on the tailoring of treatments to patient needs, as are more detailed comparisons between pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic treatments.

Boulos, Z., et al. (2002). "Light visor treatment for jet lag after westward travel across six time zones." Aviat Space Environ Med 73(10): 953-963.
	INTRODUCTION: The aim of this field study was to evaluate the efficacy of a light treatment for jet lag, using a head-mounted light visor, following a westward flight across six time zones. METHODS: There were 20 subjects who were exposed to bright white light (3000 lux) or dim red light (10 lux) for 3 h on the first two evenings after a flight from Zurich to New York. Salivary dim light melatonin onset (DLMO), assessed 2 d before and 2 d after the flight, provided a measure of circadian phase. Sleep was recorded by actigraphy, while post-flight performance testing and subjective scales provided additional indices of jet lag severity. RESULTS: The DLMO measurements showed a larger phase delay in the bright light than in the dim light group (2.59 h vs. 1.58 h, p < 0.02). There was no overall difference in sleep efficiency (SE) between the two groups, but a significant Group x Night interaction reflected a small increase across the first two post-flight nights in the bright light group, and a small decrease in the dim light group. Reaction time on one of two performance tests was consistently faster in the dim light group, but was unrelated to circadian phase or to prior sleep. There were no major group differences in subjective sleep quality, daytime sleepiness, jet lag severity, or mood. DISCUSSION: This is the first full-scale study to show that bright light treatment can accelerate circadian reentrainment following transmeridian travel. However, the effect on reentrainment rate was modest, and was not accompanied by any improvement in sleep, performance, or subjective assessments of jet lag symptoms.

Bromundt, V., et al. (2013). "Circadian sleep-wake cycles, well-being, and light therapy in borderline personality disorder." J Pers Disord 27(5): 680-696.
	Individuals with borderline personality disorder (BPD) frequently suffer from sleep disturbances. The authors investigated circadian rhythms, sleep, and well-being in women with BPD in their habitual life conditions during 3 weeks with morning light therapy (LT) and 3 weeks without LT (oLT). Sleep-wake cycles were measured using wrist actimetry, proximal skin temperature as an indirect index of relaxation, as well as weekly salivary melatonin to document the internal circadian rhythm phase. Questionnaires assessed clinical state throughout the 6-week protocol. Ten matched healthy women followed the same 6-week protocol without light treatment. Women with BPD had significantly worse subjective sleep quality and reduced daytime alertness compared to controls. Sleep-wake cycles in BPD ranged from highly disturbed to extremely regular patterns. Melatonin and proximal skin temperature profiles revealed appropriate synchronization of the circadian system with the sleep-wake cycle in most BPD women and in all controls. Morning LT significantly phase-advanced activity in BPD compared to oLT, shortened sleep duration, decreased movement time, and increased skin temperature during sleep (a marker of relaxation). Although general depression scores and borderline symptoms did not change, daytime alertness improved with morning LT, and atypical depression scores were attenuated. Morning LT is a potential adjunct treatment for BPD.

Brouwer, A., et al. (2021). "Insulin resistance as a marker for the immune-metabolic subtype of depression." J Affect Disord 295: 1371-1376.
	OBJECTIVE: Insulin resistance (IR), a marker of metabolic dysregulation and pro-inflammatory state, moderates the antidepressant treatment effect in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) and is therefore a potential marker for personalized treatment. Based on data from a light therapy trial (NTR4942), we aimed to evaluate whether 1) depression symptoms differ according to the level of IR, and 2) improvement of specific depression symptoms drive the positive effects of light therapy in those with higher IR. METHODS: This secondary analysis in 59 individuals with depression and T2D explored differences in depressive symptom profile (30-item Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology (IDS)) at baseline and in response to light therapy (versus placebo), between lower and higher IR individuals, using Likelihood Ratio tests and Linear-by-linear association. IR was measured using the gold standard, a hyperinsulinemic-euglycaemic clamp. RESULTS: At baseline, higher IR individuals reported more symptoms of irritability (p=0.024) anhedonia (no interest in people and activities: p=0.011; absence of pleasure and enjoyment: p=0.021), fatigue (fatigue: p=0.036; physical fatigue: p=0.035) and hypersomnia (p=0.029) relative to persons with lower IR, who reported more insomnia (nightly awakening: p=0.041; early morning awakening: p=0.012). Light therapy led to an improvement across IDS symptoms in higher IR individuals, while in lower IR individuals, light therapy improved early morning awakening (p=0.005) and interest in people and activities (p=0.015), but worsened mood (feeling sad: p=0.001; feeling irritable: p=0.002; interpersonal sensitivity: p=0.014). CONCLUSIONS: Results add to the hypothesis of an immune-metabolic subtype of depression, and suggest that IR might be a promising focus for precision medicine.

Brown, M. A., et al. (2011). "Circadian rhythm sleep disorder, free-running type in a sighted male with severe depression, anxiety, and agoraphobia." J Clin Sleep Med 7(1): 93-94.
	Circadian rhythm sleep disorder, free-running type (CRSD, FRT) is a disorder in which the intrinsic circadian rhythm is no longer entrained to the 24-hour schedule. A unique case of CRSD, FRT in a 67-year-old sighted male is presented. The patient had a progressively delayed time in bed (TIB) each night, so that he would cycle around the 24-h clock approximately every 30 days. This was meticulously documented each night by the patient over the course of 22 years. The patient's CRSD, FRT was associated with severe depression, anxiety, and agoraphobia. The agoraphobia may have exacerbated the CRSD, FRT. Entrainment and stabilization of his circadian rhythm was accomplished after treatment that included melatonin, light therapy, and increased sleep structure.

Brown, R. F., et al. (2017). "Can body temperature dysregulation explain the co-occurrence between overweight/obesity, sleep impairment, late-night eating, and a sedentary lifestyle?" Eat Weight Disord 22(4): 599-608.
	PURPOSE: Overweight/obesity, sleep disturbance, night eating, and a sedentary lifestyle are common co-occurring problems. There is a tendency for them to co-occur together more often than they occur alone. In some cases, there is clarity as to the time course and evolution of the phenomena. However, specific mechanism(s) that are proposed to explain a single co-occurrence cannot fully explain the more generalized tendency to develop concurrent symptoms and/or disorders after developing one of the phenomena. Nor is there a clinical theory with any utility in explaining the development of co-occurring symptoms, disorders and behaviour and the mechanism(s) by which they occur. Thus, we propose a specific mechanism-dysregulation of core body temperature (CBT) that interferes with sleep onset-to explain the development of the concurrences. METHODS: A detailed review of the literature related to CBT and the phenomena that can alter CBT or are altered by CBT is provided. RESULTS: Overweight/obesity, sleep disturbance and certain behaviour (e.g. late-night eating, sedentarism) were linked to elevated CBT, especially an elevated nocturnal CBT. A number of existing therapies including drugs (e.g. antidepressants), behavioural therapies (e.g. sleep restriction therapy) and bright light therapy can also reduce CBT. CONCLUSIONS: An elevation in nocturnal CBT that interferes with sleep onset can parsimoniously explain the development and perpetuation of common co-occurring symptoms, disorders and behaviour including overweight/obesity, sleep disturbance, late-night eating, and sedentarism. Nonetheless, a significant correlation between CBT and the above symptoms, disorders and behaviour does not necessarily imply causation. Thus, statistical and methodological issues of relevance to this enquiry are discussed including the likely presence of autocorrelation. LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level V, narrative review.

Bruin, V. M., et al. (2012). "Sleep-wake disturbances in Parkinson's disease: current evidence regarding diagnostic and therapeutic decisions." Eur Neurol 67(5): 257-267.
	Sleep disorders have been frequently reported in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD). However, there is insufficient evidence to guide precise recommendations on some diagnostic and treatment strategies. Here, we review clinical studies dealing with sleep abnormalities in PD and present clinical recommendations. Previous studies describing insomnia, excessive daytime sleepiness, narcolepsy-like episodes, circadian changes, sleep-disordered breathing, rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, vivid dreams and restless legs syndrome are evaluated. Longitudinal studies associating sleep disorders with PD onset or clinical deterioration are rare: only one longitudinal study associated daytime sleepiness with PD onset. Evidence suggests that clinical investigations must include direct questioning about depressive symptoms, nocturnal cramps, pain, nocturia and nighttime off periods. A patient interview must be conducted regarding sleep symptoms, including nightmares, abnormal behavior during sleep, snoring, restless legs syndrome and daytime sleepiness. Initial evidence indicates that light therapy improves motor function and depression. Advice on sleep hygiene, the treatment of concomitant depression and the careful use of dopaminergic drugs and hypnosedative agents should be considered. To date, very few controlled studies are available to make a recommendation for the management of sleep-wake disturbances in PD.

Burgess, H. J., et al. (2023). "A 4-Week Morning Light Treatment with Stable Sleep Timing for Individuals with Fibromyalgia: A Randomized Controlled Trial." Pain Med.
	STUDY OBJECTIVES: Fibromyalgia is characterized by chronic widespread pain, mood and sleep disturbance. Pharmacological treatments have modest efficacy and are associated with negative side effects, and alternative approaches are needed. Morning bright light treatment may assist in the management of fibromyalgia as it can reduce depressive symptoms, improve sleep, and advance circadian timing. METHODS: Sixty people with fibromyalgia (58 women, mean age 41.8 ± 13.3 years) were enrolled in a study comparing 4 weeks of a 1-hour daily morning bright light treatment (active treatment) to a morning dim light treatment (comparison treatment). Both light treatments included behavioral procedures to stabilize sleep timing. The morning bright light treatment was expected to produce larger improvements in pain and function than the dim light treatment, and larger improvements in potential mediators (mood, sleep, and circadian timing). RESULTS: Both the bright and dim light treatment groups achieved significant but similar levels of improvement in pain intensity, pain interference, physical function, depressive symptoms, and sleep disturbance. Overall, the sample on average displayed a clinically meaningful improvement in the Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire-Revised score (mean reduction of 11.2 points), comparable to that reported following physical exercise treatments. Minimal side effects were observed. CONCLUSIONS: Findings indicate that the effects of a morning bright light treatment did not exceed those of a comparison dim light treatment; yet the changes on average in both conditions revealed clinically meaningful improvements. Future research is warranted to identify what elements of this trial may have contributed to the observed effects.

Burgess, H. J., et al. (2019). "An Open Trial of Morning Bright Light Treatment Among US Military Veterans with Chronic Low Back Pain: A Pilot Study." Pain Med 20(4): 770-778.
	OBJECTIVE: To examine the feasibility, acceptability, and effects of a home-based morning bright light treatment on pain, mood, sleep, and circadian timing in US veterans with chronic low back pain. DESIGN: An open treatment trial with a seven-day baseline, followed by 13 days of a one-hour morning bright light treatment self-administered at home. Pain, pain sensitivity, mood, sleep, and circadian timing were assessed before, during, and after treatment. SETTING: Participants slept at home, with weekly study visits and home saliva collections. PARTICIPANTS: Thirty-seven US veterans with medically verified chronic low back pain. METHODS: Pain, mood, and sleep quality were assessed with questionnaires. Pain sensitivity was assessed using two laboratory tasks: a heat stimulus and an ischemia stimulus that gave measures of threshold and tolerance. Sleep was objectively assessed with wrist actigraphy. Circadian timing was assessed with the dim light melatonin onset. RESULTS: Morning bright light treatment led to reduced pain intensity, pain behavior, thermal pain threshold sensitivity, post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms, and improved sleep quality (P < 0.05). Phase advances in circadian timing were associated with reductions in pain interference (r = 0.55, P < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Morning bright light treatment is a feasible and acceptable treatment for US veterans with chronic low back pain. Those who undergo morning bright light treatment may show improvements in pain, pain sensitivity, and sleep. Advances in circadian timing may be one mechanism by which morning bright light reduces pain. Morning bright light treatment should be further explored as an innovative treatment for chronic pain conditions.

Burkhalter, H., et al. (2016). "Melatonin rhythms in renal transplant recipients with sleep-wake disturbances." Chronobiol Int 33(7): 810-820.
	We assessed salivary melatonin levels in renal transplant (RTx) recipients who participated in a randomised, multicentre wait-list controlled trial on the effect of bright light therapy on their sleep and circadian rhythms. A large proportion of RTx recipients in our cohort had unexpectedly low melatonin values, which precluded calculation of the dim-light melatonin onset (DLMO) as a circadian marker. Thus, the aim of this post hoc analysis was to describe the melatonin profile of home-dwelling RTx recipients diagnosed with sleep-wake disturbances (SWDs). The participants were characterised by means of sleep questionnaires, validated psychometric instruments [Pittsburgh sleep quality Index (PSQI), Epworth sleepiness scale (ESS), Morningness-Eveningness Questionnaire (MEQ) and Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scale (DASS)] in addition to melatonin assay in saliva. Data were analysed with descriptive statistics and group comparisons made with appropriate post hoc tests. RTx recipients [n = 29 (aged 54.83 ± 13.73, transplanted 10.62 ± 6.84 years ago)] were retrospectively grouped into two groups: RTx recipients whose dim light melatonin onset (DLMO) could be calculated (n = 11) and those whose DLMO could not be calculated (n = 18). RTx recipients having a measurable DLMO had a number of differences from those without DLMO: they were younger [46.4 ± 14.9 compared to 60.0 ± 10.3 (p = .007)], had higher haemoglobin values [135.36 ± 12.01 versus 122.82 ± 11.56 (p = .01)], less anxiety [4 (0;8) versus 12 (6.5;14) (p = .021)] and a better overall sense of coherence [SOC Score: 71.09 ± 12.78 versus 56.28 ± 15.48 (p = 0.013)]. These results suggest that RTx recipients whose DLMO could be calculated have less health impairments, underlying the relevance of a stable circadian system.

Burns, J. W., et al. (2020). "Morning Bright Light Treatment for Chronic Low Back Pain: Potential Impact on the Volatility of Pain, Mood, Function, and Sleep." Pain Med 21(6): 1153-1161.
	OBJECTIVES: Most treatment outcome studies for people with chronic low back pain (CLBP) have based analyses on and reported only the mean levels of these factors. However, high levels of pain, mood, function, and sleep volatility may represent unique factors contributing to diminished quality of life. Our goal was to determine whether bright light treatment affected both mean levels of pain, mood, function, and sleep and reduced volatility in these outcomes. METHODS: US military veterans with CLBP (N = 22) underwent an open trial with a seven-day baseline, followed by 13 days of a one-hour morning bright light treatment self-administered at their home and a 30-day follow-up. Participants completed daily diary measures at 12 Pm and 6 Pm every day during the three study epochs. RESULTS: Using location scale modeling, results suggested that, in addition to being associated with changes in mean levels of pain intensity, pain interference, negative affect, and sleep quality, bright light treatment was also related to reductions in the volatility of pain intensity and negative affect, reductions that were largely maintained during follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: Changes in mean levels and volatility were independent factors, suggesting that bright light treatment was related to participants experiencing fewer "pain flares." These findings underscore the potential importance of volatility as a future treatment target.

Campbell, S. S., et al. (1993). "Alleviation of sleep maintenance insomnia with timed exposure to bright light." J Am Geriatr Soc 41(8): 829-836.
	OBJECTIVE: Half of the population over 65 suffers from chronic sleep disturbance. As a consequence, almost 40% of hypnotic medications are prescribed to people over age 60. Yet, hypnotics are often of little benefit in this population. As such, an effective non-drug alternative could prove important in the management of age-related sleep maintenance insomnia. The current study sought to evaluate the efficacy of bright light exposure in the treatment of sleep maintenance insomnia. DESIGN: Following baseline sleep and circadian rhythms assessment, subjects with sleep-maintenance insomnia were treated with timed exposure to either bright white light or dim red light for 12 consecutive days. Sleep and circadian rhythms recordings were subsequently obtained and measures of sleep quality were compared to assess efficacy of the treatments. SETTING: Baseline and post-treatment sleep and circadian rhythms assessments took place in the Laboratory of Human Chronobiology, Department of Psychiatry, Cornell University Medical College. The treatment phase of the study was conducted in participants' homes. PARTICIPANTS: Sixteen men and women between the ages of 62 and 81 years were studied. All subjects were free of hypnotic medication, and all had experienced sleep disturbance for at least 1 year prior to entering the study. RESULTS: Exposure to bright light resulted in substantial changes in sleep quality. Waking time within sleep was reduced by an hour, and sleep efficiency improved from 77.5% to 90%, without altering time spent in bed. Increased sleep time was in the form of Stage 2 sleep, REM sleep, and slow wave sleep. The effects were remarkably consistent across subjects. CONCLUSIONS: The findings demonstrate the effectiveness of timed exposure to bright light in the treatment of age-related sleep maintenance insomnia. With further refinement of treatment regimens, this non-drug intervention may prove useful in a large proportion of sleep disturbed elderly.

Campbell, S. S., et al. (1995). "Light treatment for sleep disorders: consensus report. III. Alerting and activating effects." J Biol Rhythms 10(2): 129-132.
	In addition to the well-established phase-shifting properties of timed exposure to bright light, some investigators have reported an acute alerting, or activating, effect of bright light exposure. To the extent that bright light interventions for sleep disturbance may cause subjective and/or central nervous system activation, such a property may adversely affect the efficacy of treatment. Data obtained from patient samples and from healthy subjects generally support the notion that exposure to bright light may be associated with enhanced subjective alertness, and there is limited evidence of objective changes (EEG, skin conductance levels) that are consistent with true physiological arousal. Such activation appears to be quite transient, and there is little evidence to suggest that bright light-induced activation interferes with subsequent sleep onset. Some depressed patients, however, have experienced insomnia and hypomanic activation following bright-light exposure.

Campbell, S. S., et al. (1999). "Etiology and treatment of intrinsic circadian rhythm sleep disorders." Sleep Med Rev 3(3): 179-200.
	Some individuals experience an acute or chronic sleep disturbance, associated with a misalignment between the timing of their sleep and the sleep-wake cycle that is desired, or considered normal by society. It is estimated that 5-10% of insomniacs seeking treatment have this type of disorder, collectively called circadian rhythm sleep disorders. This paper reviews circadian rhythm sleep disorders of the intrinsic type, which include delayed sleep phase syndrome, advanced sleep phase syndrome, non-24-hour sleep-wake syndrome, and irregular sleep-wake pattern. For each disorder, we present data addressing its pathophysiology and potential treatments, including the use of behavioral measures and chronotherapy, bright light treatment and pharmacological treatments such as melatonin. We conclude by addressing some of the limitations and drawbacks of the various treatments.

Campbell, S. S., et al. (1995). "Light treatment for sleep disorders: consensus report. V. Age-related disturbances." J Biol Rhythms 10(2): 151-154.
	Sleep maintenance insomnia is a major complaint among the elderly. As a result, an inordinate proportion of sleeping pill prescriptions go to individuals over 65 y of age. Because of the substantial problems associated with use of hypnotics in older populations, efforts have been made to develop nondrug treatments for age-related sleep disturbance, including timed exposure to bright light. Such bright light treatments are based on the assumption that age-related sleep disturbance is the consequence of alterations in the usual temporal relationship between body temperature and sleep. Although studies are limited, results strongly suggest that evening bright light exposure is beneficial in alleviating sleep maintenance insomnia in healthy elderly subjects. Less consistent, but generally positive, findings have been reported with regard to bright light treatment of sleep and behavioral disturbance in demented patients. For both groups, it is likely that homeostatic factors also contribute to sleep disturbance, and these may be less influenced by bright light interventions.

Campbell, S. S., et al. (1995). "Light treatment for sleep disorders: consensus report. V. Age-related disturbances." J Biol Rhythms 10(2): 151-154.
	Sleep maintenance insomnia is a major complaint among the elderly. As a result, an inordinate proportion of sleeping pill prescriptions go to individuals over 65 y of age. Because of the substantial problems associated with use of hypnotics in older populations, efforts have been made to develop nondrug treatments for age-related sleep disturbance, including timed exposure to bright light. Such bright light treatments are based on the assumption that age-related sleep disturbance is the consequence of alterations in the usual temporal relationship between body temperature and sleep. Although studies are limited, results strongly suggest that evening bright light exposure is beneficial in alleviating sleep maintenance insomnia in healthy elderly subjects. Less consistent, but generally positive, findings have been reported with regard to bright light treatment of sleep and behavioral disturbance in demented patients. For both groups, it is likely that homeostatic factors also contribute to sleep disturbance, and these may be less influenced by bright light interventions.

Campos Costa, I., et al. (2013). "Aging, circadian rhythms and depressive disorders: a review." Am J Neurodegener Dis 2(4): 228-246.
	INTRODUCTION: Aging is typically associated with impairing behavioral patterns that are frequently and inappropriately seen as normal. Circadian rhythm changes and depressive disorders have been increasingly proposed as the two main overlapping and interpenetrating changes that take place in older age. This study aims to review the state of the art on the subject concerning epidemiology, pathophysiological mechanism, clinical findings and relevance, as well as available treatment options. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A nonsystematic review of all English language PubMed articles published between 1995 and December 2012 using the terms "circadian rhythms", "mood disorders", "depression", "age", "aging", "elderly" and "sleep". DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Sleep disorders, mainly insomnia, and depression have been demonstrated to be highly co-prevalent and mutually precipitating conditions in the elderly population. There is extensive research on the pathophysiological mechanisms through which age conditions circadian disruption, being the disruption of the Melatonin system one of the main changes. However, research linking clearly and unequivocally circadian disruption and mood disorders is still lacking. Nonetheless, there are consistently described molecular changes on shared genes and also several proposed pathophysiological models linking depression and sleep disruption, with clinical studies also suggesting a bi-directional relationship between these pathologies. In spite of this suggested relation, clinical evaluation of these conditions in elderly patients consistently reveals itself rather complicated due to the frequently co-existing co-morbidities, some of them having been demonstrated to alter sleep and mood patters. This is the case of strokes, forms of dementia such as Alzheimer and Parkinson, several neurodegenerative disorders, among others. Although there are to the present no specific treatment guidelines, available treatment options generally base themselves on the premise that depression and sleep disturbances share a bidirectional relationship and so, the adoption of measures that address specifically one of the conditions will reciprocally benefit the other. Treatment options range from Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Chronotherapy, and Light therapy, to drugs such as Melatonin/Melatonin agonists, antidepressants and sedatives.

Canazei, M., et al. (2019). "Effects of an adjunctive, chronotype-based light therapy in hospitalized patients with severe burnout symptoms - a pilot study." Chronobiol Int 36(7): 993-1004.
	Light therapy is a well-established treatment option for seasonal affective disorders and is effective in reducing sleep problems and daytime fatigue. Symptoms of severe burnout include feelings of exhaustion and impaired sleep and mood. Thus, light therapy seems promising for burnout treatment. So far, light therapy effects in burnout were investigated in outpatient settings only, with inconclusive results. The present study targeted light therapy effects in an inpatient setting. Participants with severe burnout were recruited in two psychosomatic clinics and randomly assigned to a control group with multimodal psychiatric treatment or an add-on light treatment group. Participants in the latter group were additionally exposed to morning bright light (illuminance: 4246 lux, irradiance: 1802.81 µW.cm(-2)) for 3 weeks, 30 minutes a day, timed to their chronotypes. Light effects on burnout symptoms, depression, well-being, daytime sleepiness, sleep quality, and attentional performance were measured twice (pre-/postintervention design). Adjunctive chronotype-based bright light therapy was well tolerated and improved burnout symptoms and well-being without additional effect on severity of depression. Furthermore, reduced daytime sleepiness, improved nighttime sleep quality, a sleep phase advance of 25 minutes, shortened sleep latency, less sleep disturbances and increased sleep duration were observed in the light treatment group. No group differences were found in attentional performance. Chronotype-based bright light therapy seems to be effective in improving burnout symptoms and sleep problems in patients with severe burnout symptoms. Further studies with larger sample sizes and objective measures of sleep are necessary to confirm these preliminary results before practical recommendations can be made.

Carter, K. A., et al. (2014). "Common sleep disorders in children." Am Fam Physician 89(5): 368-377.
	Up to 50% of children will experience a sleep problem. Early identification of sleep problems may prevent negative consequences, such as daytime sleepiness, irritability, behavioral problems, learning difficulties, motor vehicle crashes in teenagers, and poor academic performance. Obstructive sleep apnea occurs in 1% to 5% of children. Polysomnography is needed to diagnose the condition because it may not be detected through history and physical examination alone. Adenotonsillectomy is the primary treatment for most children with obstructive sleep apnea. Parasomnias are common in childhood; sleepwalking, sleep talking, confusional arousals, and sleep terrors tend to occur in the first half of the night, whereas nightmares are more common in the second half of the night. Only 4% of parasomnias will persist past adolescence; thus, the best management is parental reassurance and proper safety measures. Behavioral insomnia of childhood is common and is characterized by a learned inability to fall and/or stay asleep. Management begins with consistent implementation of good sleep hygiene practices, and, in some cases, use of extinction techniques may be appropriate. Delayed sleep phase disorder is most common in adolescence, presenting as difficulty falling asleep and awakening at socially acceptable times. Treatment involves good sleep hygiene and a consistent sleep-wake schedule, with nighttime melatonin and/or morning bright light therapy as needed. Diagnosing restless legs syndrome in children can be difficult; management focuses on trigger avoidance and treatment of iron deficiency, if present.

Chambe, J., et al. (2023). "Light therapy in insomnia disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis." J Sleep Res: e13895.
	In the management of insomnia, physicians and patients are seeking alternative therapeutics to sleeping pills, in addition to sleep hygiene and cognitive behavioural therapy. Bright light therapy (LT) has proven its efficacy in circadian and mood disorders. We conducted a systematic literature review and meta-analysis according to Cochrane and PRISMA guidelines and using the databases Medline, Cochrane, and Web of Science, with a special focus on light therapy and insomnia. Twenty-two studies with a total of 685 participants were included, five of which with a high level of proof. Meta-analysis was performed with 13 of them: light therapy for insomnia compared with control conditions significantly improved wake after sleep onset (WASO: SMD = -0.61 [-1.11, -0.11]; p = 0.017; weighted difference of 11.2 min ±11.5 based on actigraphy, and SMD = -1.09 [-1.43, -0.74] (p < 0.001) weighted difference of -36.4 min ±15.05) based on sleep diary, but no other sleep measures such as sleep latency, total sleep time (TST), or sleep efficiency. Qualitative analysis of the review showed some improvement mainly in subjective measures. Morning light exposure advanced sleep-wake rhythms and evening exposure led to a delay. No worsening was observed in objective nor subjective measures, except for TST in one study with evening exposure. A light dose-response may exist but the studies' heterogeneity and publication bias limit the interpretation. To conclude, light therapy shows some effectiveness for sleep maintenance in insomnia disorders, but further research is needed to refine the light parameters to be chosen according to the type of insomnia, in the hope of developing personalised therapeutics.

Chang, L. S., et al. (2023). "Multimedia Mixed Reality Interactive Shared Decision-Making Game in Children with Moderate to Severe Atopic Dermatitis, a Pilot Study." Children (Basel) 10(3).
	(1) Objective: Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a recurring skin disease that affects children's daily activities and sleep quality. Due to the limitations of children's understanding and ability to express themselves, shared decision making (SDM) is often made by guardians, which thus affects the acceptance and effectiveness of children's treatments. Previous studies have demonstrated that involving both children and parents in decision making may help improve treatment outcomes; thus, we designed a multimedia mixed reality (MR) interactive game of SDM for children with moderate to severe AD. (2) Methods: Research participants included 6-18-year-old patients with moderate to severe AD. This research consisted of the following steps: designing SDM; character setting and visual design; performing games; system modification and optimization; screen editing and dubbing; and user testing and questionnaires by the System Usability Scale (SUS). (3) Results: We completed the SDM design for children with moderate to severe AD. Four different treatments were biologics, oral immune-modulating drugs, phototherapy, and wet wrap. An animated PowerPoint slide showed the AD apple rolling around before treatments and the AD apple sleeping soundly after treatments. Instructions with video teaching for the four different treatments were played, and then, the MR was turned on so that the patients could help the AD apple in the metaverse to undergo these four treatments. A total of 12 moderate to severe AD patients and six control patients used the game, all aged between six and eighteen years old, with an average SUS score of 81.0 and a standard error of 2.1 points. Adjective ratings yielded a rating between good and excellent. The game showed acceptable usability. We found no statistically significant differences in SUS scores between patients with and without moderate to severe AD or between boys and girls nor significant associations between SUS and age or severity. The analysis identified that the two items with the lowest SUS scores were "I think that I would need the support of a technical person to be able to use this product" and "I needed to learn a lot of things before I could get going with this product". Both of these comments show the limitations of this game. (4) Conclusions: Overall, this study provides the first MR SDM game that has passed the SUS and can be used as an aid in clinical SDM.

Chee, A., et al. (2020). "When life is an itch: What harms, helps, and heals from the patients' perspective? Differences and similarities among skin diseases." Dermatol Ther 33(4): e13606.
	Itch is the commonest skin-related symptom, associated with a high psychosocial and economic burden. While the main focus of itch research lies on a few chronic skin diseases, only little is known about the perception of itch, itch-aggravating/-relieving factors and treatment preferences in patients with acute and chronic itch of various etiology. In this cross-sectional study, we assessed these aspects in 126 patients (mean age 61.7 ± 18.4 years, 67 females, median itch duration 3.9 years) using a 78-item questionnaire. The diseases were categorized into 11 diagnostic groups for descriptive analysis; the three most frequent groups ("atopic dermatitis," "nonatopic eczema," "inflammatory dermatoses") were statistically compared. Itch was most often perceived as localized 42.9%, burning (40.5%), and worrying (39.7%) with worsening in the evening (49.2%), due to warmth (42.1%) and sweating (26.2%). While itch perception, itch-aggravating factors and treatment preferences differed broadly among patients, the itch-relieving personal strategies were more uniform ("scratching by hand 70.6%, applying topicals 57.9%). Also, 69.8% of patients suffered from itch-related sleep disturbance, consequently affecting their relatives in 30.0%. Subgroup comparisons revealed significant differences regarding itch-aggravating factors (P = .0012) and itch duration (P = .0082). Patients rated the antipruritic effectiveness of phototherapy, "complementary and alternative medicine" and "other tablets" as high, but oral antihistamines, "cortisone tablets" and any topical as only moderately efficacious. The preferred administration of an ideal itch treatment was "creams/ointments" (51.6%) or "tablets" (35.7%), only few patients preferred "injections" or "patches." Consideration of such differences and similarities in itch characteristics and treatment preferences could help to better tailor treatment in itch patients.

Chiu, H. L., et al. (2017). "Effectiveness of Light Therapy in Cognitively Impaired Persons: A Metaanalysis of Randomized Controlled Trials." J Am Geriatr Soc 65(10): 2227-2234.
	OBJECTIVES: To explore the effects of light therapy on behavioral disturbances (BDs), sleep quality, and depression. DESIGN: Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. SETTING: PubMed, Cochrane Library, Medline, EMBASE, Web of Science, and clinicaltrials.gov of selected randomized controlled trials and previous systematic reviews were searched. PARTICIPANTS: Cognitively impaired persons. MEASUREMENTS: Information was extracted on study characteristics, quality assessment, and outcomes. Outcome measures included BDs, sleep quality, and depression. RESULTS: Nine randomized controlled trials were examined. The results showed that light therapy has a moderate effect on BD (g = -0.61) and depression (g = -0.58) and a small effect on total sleep time at night (g = 0.25). Subgroup analysis indicated that a light intensity of 2,500 lux or greater has a greater effect on depression than an intensity of less than 2,500 lux (P = .03), and the low risk of bias in blinding was superior to the RCTs deemed to be of high or unclear risk of bias in blinding in terms of BD (P = .02). CONCLUSION: Light therapy can relieve BD, improve sleep quality, and alleviate symptoms of depression for cognitively impaired persons.

Ciesielczyk, K., et al. (2004). "[Changes of sleep quality and mood disorders under the influence of phototherapy in patients with seasonal affective disorders SAD]." Psychiatr Pol 38(6): 1105-1114.
	Major depression, seasonal pattern (seasonal affective disorder SAD) characterize the winter recurrence depressive episodes with remission of symptoms in spring and summer. Patients with winter depression report hypersomnia, fatigue, loss of energy, carbohydrate craving, appetite and weight gain. AIM: The aim of this study was to assess the effect of phototherapy on the quality of sleep parameters and subjective estimation of mood disorders in patients with seasonal affective disorders. METHOD: The investigated group consisted of 17 patients with SAD (15 female, 2 male) aged 18-64 (mean 38+/-12) years. Phototherapy (bright light therapy) was applied for 14 days, everyday morning--30 minutes, between 6.00 to 10.00--exposition to light of about 10,000 lux intensity. Polysomnogram (sleep EEG) was recorded before and after treatment. RESULTS: After phototherapy patients reported a significant mood improvement (57%) measured by the Seasonal Pattern Assessment Questionnaire. Sleep investigation showed: increased sleep efficiency, decreased sleep latency, decreased slow wave sleep latency and increased of sleep spindles in the first hour of sleep. CONCLUSIONS: Research confirms that phototherapy is an effective method of treatment of choice for patients with SAD. The result indicates that phototherapy markedly improved mood and sleep quality.

Connolly, L. J., et al. (2021). "Development of a Home-Based Light Therapy for Fatigue Following Traumatic Brain Injury: Two Case Studies." Front Neurol 12: 651498.
	Background and Objectives: Fatigue and sleep disturbance negatively impact quality of life following brain injury and there are no established treatments. Building on research showing efficacy of blue light therapy delivered via a lightbox in reducing fatigue and daytime sleepiness after traumatic brain injury (TBI), this paper describes the development and implementation of a novel in-home light therapy to alleviate fatigue and sleep disturbance in two case studies. Methods: During the 8-week lighting intervention, participants' home lighting was adjusted to provide high intensity, blue-enriched (high melanopic) light all day as a stimulant and dimmer, blue-depleted (low melanopic) light for 3 h before sleep as a soporific. The sham 8-week control condition resembled participants' usual (baseline) lighting conditions (3,000-4,000 K all day). Lighting conditions were crossed-over. Outcomes were measures of fatigue, subjective daytime sleepiness, sleep quality, insomnia symptoms, psychomotor vigilance and mood. Case study participants were a 35-year old male (5 years post-TBI), and a 46-year-old female (22 years post-TBI). Results: The relative proportion of melanopic lux was greater in Treatment lighting than Control during daytime, and lower during evenings. Participants found treatment to be feasible to implement, and was well-tolerated with no serious side effects noted. Self-reported compliance was >70%. Both cases demonstrated reduced fatigue, sleep disturbance and insomnia symptoms during the treatment lighting intervention. Case 2 additionally showed reductions in daytime sleepiness and depressive symptoms. As expected, symptoms trended toward baseline levels during the control condition. Discussion: Treatment was positively received and compliance rates were high, with no problematic side-effects. Participants expressed interest in continuing the ambient light therapy in their daily lives. Conclusions: These cases studies demonstrate the acceptability and feasibility of implementing a personalized in-home dynamic light treatment for TBI patients, with evidence for efficacy in reducing fatigue and sleep disturbance. Clinical Trial Registration:www.anzctr.org.au, identifier: ACTRN12617000866303.

Connolly, L. J., et al. (2021). "Home-based light therapy for fatigue following acquired brain injury: a pilot randomized controlled trial." BMC Neurol 21(1): 262.
	BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Fatigue and sleep disturbance are debilitating problems following brain injury and there are no established treatments. Building on demonstrated efficacy of blue light delivered via a lightbox in reducing fatigue and daytime sleepiness after TBI, this study evaluated the efficacy of a novel in-home light intervention in alleviating fatigue, sleep disturbance, daytime sleepiness and depressive symptoms, and in improving psychomotor vigilance and participation in daily productive activity, following injury METHODS: The impact of exposure to a dynamic light intervention (Treatment) was compared to usual lighting (Control) in a randomized within-subject, crossover trial. Outcomes were fatigue (primary outcome), daytime sleepiness, sleep disturbance, insomnia symptoms, psychomotor vigilance, mood and activity levels. Participants (N = 24, M ± SD(age) = 44.3 ± 11.4) had mild-severe TBI or stroke > 3 months previously, and self-reported fatigue (Fatigue Severity Scale ≥ 4). Following 2-week baseline, participants completed each condition for 2 months in counter-balanced order, with 1-month follow-up. Treatment comprised daytime blue-enriched white light (CCT > 5000 K) and blue-depleted light (< 3000 K) 3 h prior to sleep. RESULTS: Random-effects mixed-model analysis showed no significantly greater change in fatigue on the Brief Fatigue Inventory during Treatment, but a medium effect size of improvement (p = .33, d = -0.42). There were significantly greater decreases in sleep disturbance (p = .004), insomnia symptoms (p = .036), reaction time (p = .004) and improvements in productive activity (p = .005) at end of Treatment relative to Control, with large effect sizes (d > 0.80). Changes in other outcomes were non-significant. CONCLUSIONS: This pilot study provides preliminary support for in-home dynamic light therapy to address sleep-related symptoms in acquired brain injury. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This trial was registered with the Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry on 13 June 2017, www.anzctr.org.au , ACTRN12617000866303.

Connolly, L. J., et al. (2021). "Factors Associated With Response to Pilot Home-Based Light Therapy for Fatigue Following Traumatic Brain Injury and Stroke." Front Neurol 12: 651392.
	Background: Fatigue and sleep disturbance are common and debilitating problems after brain injury. Light therapy shows promise as a potential treatment. We conducted a trial of in-home light therapy to alleviate fatigue and sleep disturbance. The aim of the current study was to identify factors moderating treatment response. Methods: Participants were 24 individuals with traumatic brain injury (TBI) (n = 19) or stroke (n = 5) reporting clinically significant fatigue. Outcomes included fatigue on Brief Fatigue Inventory (primary outcome), sleep disturbance on Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, reaction time (RT) on Psychomotor Vigilance Task and time spent in productive activity. Interactions of demographic and clinical variables with these outcomes were examined in linear mixed-model analyses. Results: Whilst there were no variables found to be significantly associated with change in our primary outcome of fatigue, some variables revealed medium or large effect sizes, including chronotype, eye color, injury severity as measured by PTA, and baseline depressive symptoms. Chronotype significantly moderated sleep quality, with evening chronotype being associated with greater improvement during treatment. Injury type significantly predicted mean RT, with stroke participants exhibiting greater post-treatment reduction than TBI. Age significantly predicted productive activity during Treatment, with younger participants showing stronger Treatment effect. Conclusion: Light therapy may have a greater impact on sleep in younger individuals and those with an evening chronotype. Older individuals may need higher treatment dose to achieve benefit. Clinical Trial Registration: www.anzctr.org.au, identifier: ACTRN12617000866303.

Cooke, K. M., et al. (1998). "The effects of evening light exposure on the sleep of elderly women expressing sleep complaints." J Behav Med 21(1): 103-114.
	In order to address the typical phase advanced, disturbed sleep of the elderly, additional evening light was provided to elderly women by means of a "visor" which provides 2000 lux to each eye. The subjects wore the light visor for 30 min in the evening. The subjects were 10 community-residing women over the age of 65 (mean = 79.4 years; range, 67-87 years). Sleep was recorded in the home for 28 successive 24-hr periods: 7 days pretreatment, 14 days while using the light visor, and 7 days posttreatment. Thus, each subject served as her own control. Sleep was recorded using the Home Monitoring System (HMS), a nonintrusive procedure which does not require instrumentation of the subject. The subjects showed significant changes during and even after the intervention: there was a significant decrease in sleep latency over weeks, and a significant increase in sleep time and sleep efficiency. The subjects also reported less fatigue during treatment. The results suggest that additional light, provided for as little as 0.5 hr in the evening and at only 2000 lux, increases the amount of nighttime sleep and improves the quality of sleep in older women.

Corbett, R. W., et al. (2012). "An hour of bright white light in the early morning improves performance and advances sleep and circadian phase during the Antarctic winter." Neurosci Lett 525(2): 146-151.
	Previous work has demonstrated that exposure to an hour of bright light in the morning and the evening during the Polar winter has beneficial effects on circadian phase. This study investigated the effect of a single hour of bright white morning light on circadian phase, sleep, alertness and cognitive performance. Nine individuals (eight male, one female, median age 30 years), wintering at Halley Research Station (75°S), Antarctica from 7th May until 6th August 2007, were exposed to bright white light for a fortnight from 08:30 to 09:30 h, with two fortnight control periods on either side. This sequence was performed twice, before and following Midwinter. Light exposure, sleep and alertness were assessed daily by actigraphy, sleep diaries and subjective visual analogue scales. Circadian phase (assessed by urinary 6-sulphatoxymelatonin rhythm) and cognitive performance were evaluated at the end of each fortnight. During light exposure circadian phase was advanced from 4.97 ± 0.96 decimal hours (dh) (mean ± SD) to 4.08 ± 0.68 dh (p = 0.003). Wake-up time was shifted by a similar margin from 8.45 ± 1.83 dh to 7.59 ± 0.78 dh (p < 0.001). Sleep start time was also advanced (p = 0.047) but by a lesser amount, consequently, actual sleep time was slightly reduced. There was no change in objective or subjective measures of sleep quality or subjective measures of alertness. An improvement in cognitive performance was found with both the Single Letter Cancellation Test (p < 0.001) and the Digit Symbol Substitution Test (p = 0.026) with preserved circadian variation. These beneficial effects of a single short duration light treatment may have implications not only for the Antarctic but other remote environments where access to natural light and delayed circadian phase, is problematic. These results require validation in larger studies at varying locations.

Cordone, S., et al. (2021). "Sleep-Based Interventions in Alzheimer's Disease: Promising Approaches from Prevention to Treatment along the Disease Trajectory." Pharmaceuticals (Basel) 14(4).
	The multifactorial nature of Alzheimer's disease (AD) has led scientific researchers to focus on the modifiable and treatable risk factors of AD. Sleep fits into this context, given the bidirectional relationship with AD confirmed by several studies over the last years. Sleep disorders appear at an early stage of AD and continue throughout the entire course of the pathology. Specifically, sleep abnormalities, such as more fragmented sleep, increase in time of awakenings, worsening of sleep quality and primary sleep disorders raise with the severity and progression of AD. Intervening on sleep, therefore, means acting both with prevention strategies in the pre-clinical phase and with treatments during the course of the disease. This review explores sleep disturbances in the different stages of AD, starting from the pre-clinical stage. Particular attention is given to the empirical evidence investigating obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) disorder and the mechanisms overlapping and sharing with AD. Next, we discuss sleep-based intervention strategies in the healthy elderly population, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and AD patients. We mention interventions related to behavioral strategies, combination therapies, and bright light therapy, leaving extensive space for new and raising evidence on continuous positive air pressure (CPAP) treatment effectiveness. Finally, we clarify the role of NREM sleep across the AD trajectory and consider the most recent studies based on the promising results of NREM sleep enhancement, which use innovative experimental designs and techniques.

Cosker, E., et al. (2021). "Portable light therapy in the treatment of unipolar non-seasonal major depressive disorder: study protocol for the LUMIDEP randomised controlled trial." BMJ Open 11(7): e049331.
	INTRODUCTION: Major depressive disorder (MDD) affects more than 264 million people worldwide and is associated with an impaired quality of life as well as a higher risk of mortality. Current routine treatments demonstrate limited effectiveness. Light therapy (LT) on its own or in combination with antidepressant treatments could be an effective treatment, but the use of conventional LT devices use is restrictive. Portable LT devices allow patients to continue with their day-to-day activities and therefore encourage better treatment compliance. They have not been evaluated in MDD. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: The study is a single-centre, double-blind, randomised controlled trial assessing the efficacy of LT delivered via a portable device in addition to usual care (medical care and drug treatment) for inpatients and outpatients with unipolar non-seasonal MDD. Over the course of 8 weeks, patients use the device daily for 30 min at medium intensity as soon as possible after waking up and preferably between 07:00 and 09:00. All patients continue their usual care with their referring physician. N=50 patients with MDD are included. The primary outcome measure is depressive symptom severity assessed using the Montgomery-Åsberg Depression Rating Scale between baseline and the eighth week. Secondary outcome measures are sleep quality assessed using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index and Epworth Sleepiness Scale and anxiety level assessed on the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale, between baseline and week 8. Further parameters relating to cognitive function are measured at baseline and after the intervention. An ancillary study aims to evaluate the impact of MDD on the retina and to follow its progression. Main limitations include risk of discontinuation or non-adherence and bias in patient selection. ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study protocol was approved by Ile de France X's Ethics Committee (protocol number 34-2018). Findings will be published in peer-reviewed journals. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT03685942.

Costello, A., et al. (2023). "Effects of light therapy on sleep/wakefulness, daily rhythms, and the central orexin system in a diurnal rodent model of seasonal affective disorder." J Affect Disord 332: 299-308.
	BACKGROUND: Bright light therapy (BLT) is the first-line treatment for seasonal affective disorder. However, the neural mechanisms underlying BLT are unclear. To begin filling this gap, the present study examined the impact of BLT on sleep/wakefulness, daily rhythms, and the wakefulness-promoting orexin/hypocretin system in a diurnal rodent, Nile grass rats (Arvicanthis niloticus). METHODS: Male and female grass rats were housed under a 12:12 h light/dark cycle with dim light (50 lx) during the day. The experimental group received daily 1-h early morning BLT (full-spectrum white light, 10,000 lx), while the control group received narrowband red light for 4 weeks. Sleep/wakefulness and in-cage locomotor activity were monitored, followed by examination of hypothalamic prepro-orexin and orexin receptors OX1R and OX2R expression in corticolimbic brain regions. RESULTS: The BLT group had higher wakefulness during light treatment, better nighttime sleep quality, and improved daily rhythm entrainment compared to controls. The impact of BLT on the orexin system was sex- and brain region-specific, with males showing higher OX1R and OX2R in the CA1, while females showed higher prepro-orexin but lower OX1R and OX2R in the BLA, compared to same-sex controls. LIMITATIONS: The present study focused on the orexin system in a limited number of brain regions at a single time point. Sex wasn't a statistical factor, as male and female cohorts were run independently. CONCLUSIONS: The diurnal grass rats show similar behavioral responses to BLT as humans, thus could be a good model for further elucidating the neural mechanisms underlying the therapeutic effects of BLT.

Cremascoli, R., et al. (2021). "Effects of Circadian Phase Tailored Light Therapy on Sleep, Mood, and Cognition in Alzheimer's Disease: Preliminary Findings in a Pivotal Study." Front Physiol 12: 755322.
	It is shown that the circadian system is affected in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) even at an early stage of the disease and that such dysfunction may be detrimental to sleep, mood, and cognitive functioning. Light is a strong central modulator of the circadian rhythms and is potentially beneficial to mood and cognitive functioning via a direct effect or indirectly via its modulating effects on circadian rhythms. This study focuses on tracking the effect of light therapy on sleep quality, mood, and cognition in AD of mild/moderate severity. We performed a single-blind randomized controlled trial to investigate the effects of a light therapy treatment tailored to the individual circadian phase as measured by dim light melatonin onset (DLMO). Such a treatment induced an objective circadian phase shift consistent with the melatonin phase response curve to light exposure, led to a shortening of the phase angle DLMO-falling asleep time, and was associated with an improvement in subjective sleep quality and cognitive performance.

Culnan, E., et al. (2019). "Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Phase Disorders." Neurol Clin 37(3): 527-543.
	This article reviews delayed and advanced sleep-wake phase disorders. Diagnostic procedures include a clinical interview to verify the misalignment of the major nocturnal sleep episode relative to the desired and social-normed timing of sleep, a 3-month or greater duration of the sleep-wake disturbance, and at least a week of sleep diary data consistent with the sleep timing complaint. Treatment options include gradual, daily shifting of the sleep schedule (chronotherapy); shifting circadian phase with properly timed light exposure (phototherapy); or melatonin administration. Future directions are discussed to conclude the article.

Cyr, M., et al. (2022). "The effect of evening light on circadian-related outcomes: A systematic review." Sleep Med Rev 64: 101660.
	Bright light exposure at night can help workers adapt to their shift schedules, but there has been relatively little research on evening light. We conducted a systematic review of studies that manipulated light exposure in the evening (broadly defined as 16:00-22:00) before real or simulated night shifts. Across the five eligible studies, evening light produced phase delays in melatonin, body temperature, and sleep propensity; it also improved sleep quality, sleep duration, memory, and work performance. There were mixed effects for mood, no changes in sleepiness, and no negative effects. The confidence in these results ranged from moderate for physiological markers of circadian phase delays to very low for mood. Future studies should compare the relative effectiveness and safety of evening versus night-time light exposure. Overall, the benefits of evening light for shift workers are tentative yet promising.

Dautovich, N. D., et al. (2010). "Tackling sleeplessness: Psychological treatment options for insomnia." Nat Sci Sleep 2: 23-37.
	The purpose of the present paper is to review and summarize the research supporting nonpharmacologic treatment options for insomnia. The different treatment approaches are described followed by a review of both original research articles and meta-analyses. Meta-analytic reviews suggest that common nonpharmacologic approaches exert, on average, medium to large effect sizes on SOL, WASO, NWAK, SQR, and SE while smaller effects are seen for TST. Stimulus control therapy, relaxation training, and CBT-I are considered standard treatments for insomnia by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM). Sleep restriction, multicomponent therapy without cognitive therapy, paradoxical intention, and biofeedback approaches have received some levels of support by the AASM. Sleep hygiene, imagery training, and cognitive therapy did not receive recommendation levels as single (standalone) therapies by the AASM due to lack of empirical evidence. Less common approaches have been introduced (Internet-based interventions, bright light treatment, biofeedback, mindfulness, acupuncture, and intensive sleep retraining) but require further research. Brief and group treatments have been shown to be as efficacious as longer and individually-administered treatments. Considerations are presented for special populations, including older adults, children and teens, individuals from diverse cultural backgrounds, insomnia comorbid with other disorders, and individuals who are taking hypnotics.

Dauvilliers, Y. (2007). "Insomnia in patients with neurodegenerative conditions." Sleep Med 8 Suppl 4: S27-34.
	Comorbid insomnia and other sleep disturbances are common in patients with neurodegenerative disorders, such as Parkinson's or Alzheimer's disease. Insomnia in patients with neurological conditions may occur as a direct consequence of the disease itself or may be secondary to factors associated with the condition, such as pain, depression or the effects of medications. Disturbed sleep can have a significant impact on the patient's cognitive and physical function and may be associated with distress and depression. Insomnia also impacts patients' and caregivers' quality of life and is often cited as one of the primary reasons for patient institutionalization. Management of insomnia in patients with neurological disorders should be individualized to each patient's needs. The type of insomnia and any underlying causes of disturbed sleep must first be determined. Non-pharmacological interventions, such as behavioral modification, should be considered for all patients. Bright light therapy may be an effective treatment option for patients with disturbed sleep-wake patterns. Medications causing sleep problems should be withdrawn or doses and/or timing adjusted, whenever possible. Several pharmacological options are available to relieve the symptoms of insomnia as short-term treatment.

David, R., et al. (2010). "Non-pharmacologic management of sleep disturbance in Alzheimer's disease." J Nutr Health Aging 14(3): 203-206.
	Sleep and wake in Alzheimer's disease (AD) are often fragmented as manifested by bouts of wakefulness at night and napping during the day. Management of sleep disturbances in AD is important because of their negative impact on both patients and caregivers. Pharmacological treatments, mainly sedative-hypnotics and antipsychotics, are often used but can be associated with significant adverse effects. Non-pharmacological treatments represent a beneficial alternative approach to the management of sleep disturbances in AD since they are associated with fewer adverse effects and their efficacy can be sustained after treatment has been completed. The aim of this article is to review non-pharmacological treatments, such as sleep hygiene, sleep restriction therapy (SRT), cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), light therapy, and continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), for the management of sleep/wake disturbances in AD.

Davis, M. P. and H. W. Goforth (2014). "Long-term and short-term effects of insomnia in cancer and effective interventions." Cancer J 20(5): 330-344.
	Sleep disorders and insomnia are more prevalent in patients with cancer than in the normal population. Sleep disorders consist of delayed sleep latency, waking episodes after sleep onset, unrefreshing sleep, reduced quality of sleep, and reduced sleep efficiency. Sleep disorders cluster with pain, fatigue, depression, anxiety, and vasomotor symptoms, depending on stage of disease, treatment, and comorbidities. Premorbid sleep problems and shift work have been associated with a higher prevalence of cancer; in fact, shift work has been labeled a carcinogen. Treatment for insomnia includes cognitive behavioral therapy with sleep hygiene, bright-light therapy, exercise, yoga, melatonin, and hypnotic medications. Unfortunately, there are few randomized trials in cancer-related sleep disorders such that most recommendations particularly for hypnotics are based on treatment for primary insomnia. In this article, insomnia is reviewed as a predisposing factor to cancer, prior to and during treatment, in cancer survivorship and in advanced cancer. Recommendations for treatment are based on low-quality evidence but are also reviewed.

Dawson, D., et al. (1995). "Improving adaptation to simulated night shift: timed exposure to bright light versus daytime melatonin administration." Sleep 18(1): 11-21.
	Chronic circadian disturbance is thought to cause many of the health and social problems reported by shift workers. In recent years, appropriately timed exposure to bright light and exogenous melatonin have been used to accelerate adaptation to phase shifts of the circadian system. In this study we compared adaptation to night shift in three groups of subjects. The first treatment group received timed exposure to bright light (4-7,000 lux between 2400 and 0400 hours on each of three night shifts). The second treatment group received exogenous melatonin by capsule (2 mg at 0800 hours then 1 mg at 1100 and 1400 hours). The placebo control groups received either dim red light at less than 50 lux or placebo (sucrose) in identical capsules at the same time. Results indicated that all groups shifted significantly from baseline. Using the dim-light melatonin onset as a circadian marker, the bright-light group shifted the furthest, whereas there was no significant difference between the melatonin and placebo groups. Sleep quality as determined by wrist actigraphy was most improved in the light-treatment group, although the melatonin group also showed significant improvements. Cognitive psychomotor performance was most improved in the light-treatment group and the melatonin group again showed little difference from the control group. Although melatonin was unable to increase the amount of the phase shift following transition to night shift, it is likely that the intermediate levels of improvement in sleep reflect the hypothermic effects of melatonin. By lowering core temperature across the sleep period, sleep may be enhanced. This improvement in sleep quality did not produce concomitant improvements in shift performance for the melatonin group. This suggests that the enhanced performance in the light-treatment group may reflect more direct "energizing" effects. On the basis of these results, bright light is clearly superior in its ability ot phase shift the circadian system and thereby improve sleep and performance. However, melatonin may permit shift workers to override the circadian system for short periods and avoid the potential toxicity due to overzealous manipulations of the circadian pacemaker. In rapidly rotating shift schedules, melatonin may be preferable because it would not require workers to reverse the large phase shift induced by light.

De Rui, M., et al. (2015). "Sleep and circadian rhythms in hospitalized patients with decompensated cirrhosis: effect of light therapy." Neurochem Res 40(2): 284-292.
	Patients with liver cirrhosis often exhibit sleep-wake abnormalities, which are, at least to some extent, circadian in origin. A relatively novel non-pharmacological approach to circadian disruption is appropriately timed bright light therapy. The aims of this pilot study were to investigate sleep-wake characteristics of a well-characterized population of inpatients with cirrhosis, and to evaluate the efficacy of bright light therapy in the hospital setting. Twelve consecutive inpatients with cirrhosis underwent complete sleep-wake assessment, to include qualitative and semi-quantitative (actigraphic) indices of night-time sleep quality, daytime sleepiness, diurnal preference, habitual sleep timing, quality of life, mood and circadian rhythmicity [i.e. urine collections for measurement of the melatonin metabolite 6-sulphatoxymelatonin (aMT6s)]. Patients showed extremely impaired night sleep quality (Pittsburg Sleep Quality Index global score: 16.3 ± 2.1) and daytime sleepiness was common (Epworth Sleepiness Scale: 8.3 ± 3.2). Five patients were randomly assigned to a single room in which lighting was controlled in relation to timing, spectral composition and intensity (lights on at 06:30 and off at 22:30, blue-enriched, more intense light in the morning, red-enriched, less intense light in the afternoon/evening); the others stayed in identical rooms with standard lighting. Sleep diaries revealed poor sleep quality, prolonged sleep latency (67 ± 138 min) and a reduced sleep efficiency (69 ± 21%). These features were confirmed by actigraphy (sleep efficiency: 71 ± 13%; fragmentation index: 55 ± 15%). Quality of life was globally impaired, and mood moderately depressed (Beck Depression Inventory: 19.4 ± 7.9). Seven patients underwent serial urine collections: no circadian aMT6s rhythm was detected in any of them, neither at baseline, nor during the course of hospitalization in either room (n = 4). In conclusion, sleep and circadian rhythms in hospitalized, decompensated patients with cirrhosis are extremely compromised. Treatment with bright light therapy did not show obvious, beneficial effects, most likely in relation to the severity of disturbance at baseline.

Dekker, K., et al. (2020). "Combined Internet-Based Cognitive-Behavioral and Chronobiological Intervention for Insomnia: A Randomized Controlled Trial." Psychother Psychosom 89(2): 117-118.
	
Deschenes, C. L. and S. M. McCurry (2009). "Current treatments for sleep disturbances in individuals with dementia." Curr Psychiatry Rep 11(1): 20-26.
	Sleep disturbances are widespread among older adults. Degenerative neurologic disorders that cause dementia, such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, exacerbate age-related changes in sleep, as do many common comorbid medical and psychiatric conditions. Medications used to treat chronic illness and insomnia have many side effects that can further disrupt sleep and place patients at risk for injury. This article reviews the neurophysiology of sleep in normal aging and sleep changes associated with common dementia subtypes and comorbid conditions. Current pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic evidence-based treatment options are discussed, including the use of light therapy, increased physical and social activity, and multicomponent cognitive-behavioral interventions for improving sleep in institutionalized and community-dwelling adults with dementia.

Dewan, K., et al. (2011). "Light-induced changes of the circadian clock of humans: increasing duration is more effective than increasing light intensity." Sleep 34(5): 593-599.
	STUDY OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effect of increasing the intensity and/or duration of exposure on light-induced changes in the timing of the circadian clock of humans. DESIGN: Multifactorial randomized controlled trial, between and within subject design SETTING: General Clinical Research Center (GCRC) of an academic medical center PARTICIPANTS: 56 healthy young subjects (20-40 years of age) INTERVENTIONS: Research subjects were admitted for 2 independent stays of 4 nights/3 days for treatment with bright or dim-light (randomized order) at a time known to induce phase delays in circadian timing. The intensity and duration of the bright light were determined by random assignment to one of 9 treatment conditions (duration of 1, 2, or 3 hours at 2000, 4000, or 8000 lux). MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Treatment-induced changes in the dim light melatonin onset (DLMO) and dim light melatonin offset (DLMOff) were measured from blood samples collected every 20-30 min throughout baseline and post-treatment nights. Comparison by multi-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) of light-induced changes in the time of the circadian melatonin rhythm for the 9 conditions revealed that changing the duration of the light exposure from 1 to 3 h increased the magnitude of light-induced delays. In contrast, increasing from moderate (2,000 lux) to high (8,000 lux) intensity light did not alter the magnitude of phase delays of the circadian melatonin rhythm. CONCLUSIONS: Results from the present study suggest that for phototherapy of circadian rhythm sleep disorders in humans, a longer period of moderate intensity light may be more effective than a shorter exposure period of high intensity light.

Dietzel, M., et al. (1986). "Light treatment in depressive illness. Polysomnographic, psychometric and neuroendocrinological findings." Eur Neurol 25 Suppl 2: 93-103.
	Objective and subjective quality of sleep and awakening as well as circadian rhythms in cortisol, temperature and well-being were investigated in 10 female hospitalized depressed patients diagnosed as major depressive disorders according to RDC criteria before (baseline), during (intervention) and after (recovery) treatment with biologically active or bright light (BL) and were compared with the findings in 10 normals. Polysomnographic evaluation demonstrated in depressed patients an increased sleep latency, decreased total sleep time, attenuated S4 and augmented REM sleep, as well as a shortened REM latency and a statistically significant increased average REM length as compared with normals. BL tended to shorten sleep onset, decrease number of awakenings, increase REM latency and significantly attenuated the average REM length. Subjective sleep quality tended to improve as did the subjective awakening quality after the recovery night. There was, however, a statistically significant improvement of the objectively evaluated quality of awakening and early morning behavior characterized by an improved attention, reaction time and performance in the reaction time task, while concentration and psychomotor activity tended to improve as as well. BL effects were also seen in hormonal secretion patterns: circadian cortisol secretion maxima occurred earlier in depressed patients than in normals before and after BL treatment, while during BL intervention this difference disappeared. Circadian temperature rhythms did not exhibit any significant findings with the exception of an earlier occurring minimum in depressed patients than in normals after treatment. Finally, subjective well-being as rated by means of an analogue scale was significantly worse in depressed patients than normals before but not during and after light treatment. The findings are discussed.

Doljansky, J. T., et al. (2005). "Working under daylight intensity lamp: an occupational risk for developing circadian rhythm sleep disorder?" Chronobiol Int 22(3): 597-605.
	A 47-yr-old male was admitted to the Institute for Fatigue and Sleep Medicine complaining of severe fatigue and daytime sleepiness. His medical history included diagnosis of depression and chronic fatigue syndrome. Antidepressant drugs failed to improve his condition. He described a gradual evolvement of an irregular sleep-wake pattern within the past 20 yrs, causing marked distress and severe impairment of daily functioning. He had to change to a part-time position 7 yrs ago, because he was unable to maintain a regular full-time job schedule. A 10-day actigraphic record revealed an irregular sleep-wake pattern with extensive day-to-day variability in sleep onset time and sleep duration, and a 36 h sampling of both melatonin level and oral temperature (12 samples, once every 3 h) showed abnormal patterns, with the melatonin peak around noon and oral temperature peak around dawn. Thus, the patient was diagnosed as suffering from irregular sleep-wake pattern. Treatment with melatonin (5 mg, 2 h before bedtime) did not improve his condition. A further investigation of the patient's daily habits and environmental conditions revealed two important facts. First, his occupation required work under a daylight intensity lamp (professional diamond-grading equipment of more than 8000 lux), and second, since the patient tended to work late, the exposure to bright light occurred mostly at night. To recover his circadian rhythmicity and stabilize his sleep-wake pattern, we recommended combined treatment consisting of evening melatonin ingestion combined with morning (09:00 h) bright light therapy (0800 lux for 1 h) plus the avoidance of bright light in the evening. Another 10-day actigraphic study done only 1 wk after initiating the combined treatment protocol revealed stabilization of the sleep-wake pattern with advancement of sleep phase. In addition, the patient reported profound improvement in maintaining wakefulness during the day. This case study shows that chronic exposure to bright light at the wrong biological time, during the nighttime, may have serious effects on the circadian sleep-wake patterns and circadian time structure. Therefore, night bright light exposure must be considered to be a risk factor of previously unrecognized occupational diseases of altered circadian time structure manifested as irregularity of the 24 h sleep-wake cycle and melancholy.

Dugdale, Z., et al. (2022). "Findings from a systematic review of fatigue interventions: What's (not) being tested in mining and other industrial environments." Am J Ind Med 65(4): 248-261.
	BACKGROUND: Fatigue negatively impacts mineworker health and safety. In this paper, we identify fatigue interventions tested on industrial shiftworkers and explore their effects and the factors that may influence application in an industrial setting such as a mine site. METHODS: This review adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist. A structured, systematic search of the literature was conducted to identify relevant studies published between 1980 and 2020. Researchers independently conducted article screening and study quality appraisals against pre-established criteria, and then extracted data and conducted a narrative synthesis of the included studies. RESULTS: Seven intervention studies, out of 1651 articles initially screened, were retained for narrative synthesis. Four studies tested the alerting effects of bright-light treatment, one evaluated the effectiveness of blue-light blocking glasses at improving daytime sleep quality and nighttime vigilance, and two examined whether sleep hygiene and alertness management trainings improved sleep quality or alertness. There was substantial evidence for the use of bright-light treatments to improve night shiftworker alertness, but insufficient evidence to draw conclusions about the effectiveness of blue-light blocking glasses and sleep hygiene and alertness management trainings due to the small number of studies included. Shiftworkers were mostly male and employed in industrial subsectors such as production and manufacturing, oil and gas, and transportation. No mining-specific intervention studies were identified. CONCLUSIONS: Future research is needed to identify effective fatigue risk management interventions for the mining industry as well as best practices for implementing these interventions with mineworkers.

Durlach, J., et al. (2002). "Chronopathological forms of magnesium depletion with hypofunction or with hyperfunction of the biological clock." Magnes Res 15(3-4): 263-268.
	The main mechanisms of the chronopathological forms of magnesium depletion associate a low Mg intake with various dysregulating biorhythms. The differentiation between forms with hyperfunction and forms with hypofunction of the biological clock is seminal and the main marker is the production of melatonin (MT). The clinical forms of the various patterns of the chronopathological forms of Mg depletion may be central or peripheral. The clinical forms with hyperfunction of the biological clock (marker: increase in MT) may associate diverse expressions of nervous hypoexcitability: depression (i.e. Seasonal affective disease); cephalalgias nocturnal, without photophobia (i.e. cluster headaches); dyssomnia LASPS (advanced sleep phase syndrome) particularly]; asthenia and myalgias (i.e. fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue syndrome). The main comorbidity is found with depressive states. The therapy relies on classical bright light phototherapy, sometimes associated with psychoanaleptics. The clinical forms with hypofunction of biological clock (marker: decrease in MT) may associate various signs of nervous hyperexcitability (HEN): anxiety (from generalized anxiety to panic attacks); cephalalgias diurnal with photophobia (mainly migraine); dyssomnia [DSPS (delayed sleep phase syndrome) particularly, jet lag, night work disorders, age related insomnia, sometimes with inappropriate behaviour; photogenic epilepsia, generalized or focal; some clinical forms of chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia. The main comorbidity is between migraine and epilepsia. The treatment relies on the diverse forms of darkness therapy, possibly with the help of some psycholeptics: anxiolytics and anticonvulsants. The indications of chromatotherapy remain to be validated.

Düzgün, G. and A. Durmaz Akyol (2017). "Effect of Natural Sunlight on Sleep Problems and Sleep Quality of the Elderly Staying in the Nursing Home." Holist Nurs Pract 31(5): 295-302.
	This study was designed as an intervention study to determine the effect of light therapy on sleep problems and sleep quality of elderly people. The study sample was composed of a total of 61 elderly persons from Social Security Institution Narlıdere Municipal Nursing Home, 30 in the test group and 31 in the control group. Those 65 years and older, not diagnosed with major depression, not exercising regularly, not having sun allergy, not using sleeping pills, independent in activities of daily living, and having bad sleep quality were included in the study. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, the Demographic Data Form, and the Follow-up Form for Elderly were used for data collection, whereas the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index was used for sample selection. It was found that exposure to direct sunlight between 8 AM and 10 AM for 5 days seems to be effective in increasing the global sleep quality score (P < .001). In light of the findings in this study, it is suggested that allocating living places in the institution's architectural setting and providing social opportunities for elderly persons to get direct sunlight exposure can help increase the sleep quality of older adults.

Eastman, C. I., et al. (2005). "Advancing circadian rhythms before eastward flight: a strategy to prevent or reduce jet lag." Sleep 28(1): 33-44.
	STUDY OBJECTIVES: To develop a practical pre-eastward flight treatment to advance circadian rhythms as much as possible but not misalign them with sleep. DESIGN: One group had their sleep schedule advanced by 1 hour per day and another by 2 hours per day. SETTING: Baseline at home, treatment in lab. PARTICIPANTS: Young healthy adults (11 men, 15 women) between the ages of 22 and 36 years. INTERVENTIONS: Three days of a gradually advancing sleep schedule (1 or 2 hours per day) plus intermittent morning bright light (one-half hour approximately 5000 lux, one-half hour of <60 lux) for 3.5 hours. MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: The dim light melatonin onset was assessed before and after the 3-day treatment. Subjects completed daily sleep logs and symptom questionnaires and wore wrist activity monitors. The dim light melatonin onset advanced more in the 2-hours-per-day group than in the 1-hour-per-day group (median phase advances of 1.9 and 1.4 hours), but the difference between the means (1.8 and 1.5 hours) was not statistically significant. By the third treatment day, circadian rhythms were misaligned relative to the sleep schedule, and subjects had difficulty falling asleep in the 2-hours-per-day group, but this was not the case in the 1-hour-per-day group. Nevertheless, the 2-hours-per-day group did slightly better on the symptom questionnaires. In general, sleep disturbance and other side effects were small. CONCLUSIONS: A gradually advancing sleep schedule with intermittent morning bright light can be used to advance circadian rhythms before eastward flight and, thus, theoretically, prevent or reduce subsequent jet lag. Given the morning light treatment used here, advancing the sleep schedule 2 hours per day is not better than advancing it 1 hour per day because it was too fast for the advance in circadian rhythms. A diagram is provided to help the traveler plan a preflight schedule.

Elder, G. J. and E. Flo-Groeneboom (2022). "How can light be used to optimize sleep and health in older adults?" Prog Brain Res 273(1): 331-355.
	Globally, society is aging and changes to the timing and quality of sleep are often observed in older adults (aged ≥65years). Good sleep quality, and sufficient sleep duration, is necessary to maintain good physical and psychological health, and strategies which optimize good sleep will be important in an aging society. Light has a very powerful effect upon sleep and circadian rhythms, and has specific advantages including the relative low cost, ease of administration and lack of interaction with other medications. For this reason, bright light treatment is a promising method for optimizing sleep and circadian rhythmicity in older adults. In this chapter, we examine whether bright light treatment could be used to optimize sleep, circadian rhythms, and health in older adults. We also outline a range of methodological considerations which need to be addressed to increase the feasibility, acceptability and effectiveness of light treatment in older adults.

Elliott, J. E., et al. (2022). "Feasibility and preliminary efficacy for morning bright light therapy to improve sleep and plasma biomarkers in US Veterans with TBI. A prospective, open-label, single-arm trial." PLoS One 17(4): e0262955.
	Mild traumatic brain injury (TBI) is associated with persistent sleep-wake dysfunction, including insomnia and circadian rhythm disruption, which can exacerbate functional outcomes including mood, pain, and quality of life. Present therapies to treat sleep-wake disturbances in those with TBI (e.g., cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia) are limited by marginal efficacy, poor patient acceptability, and/or high patient/provider burden. Thus, this study aimed to assess the feasibility and preliminary efficacy of morning bright light therapy, to improve sleep in Veterans with TBI (NCT03578003). Thirty-three Veterans with history of TBI were prospectively enrolled in a single-arm, open-label intervention using a lightbox (~10,000 lux at the eye) for 60-minutes every morning for 4-weeks. Pre- and post-intervention outcomes included questionnaires related to sleep, mood, TBI, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and pain; wrist actigraphy as a proxy for objective sleep; and blood-based biomarkers related to TBI/sleep. The protocol was rated favorably by ~75% of participants, with adherence to the lightbox and actigraphy being ~87% and 97%, respectively. Post-intervention improvements were observed in self-reported symptoms related to insomnia, mood, and pain; actigraphy-derived measures of sleep; and blood-based biomarkers related to peripheral inflammatory balance. The severity of comorbid PTSD was a significant positive predictor of response to treatment. Morning bright light therapy is a feasible and acceptable intervention that shows preliminary efficacy to treat disrupted sleep in Veterans with TBI. A full-scale randomized, placebo-controlled study with longitudinal follow-up is warranted to assess the efficacy of morning bright light therapy to improve sleep, biomarkers, and other TBI related symptoms.

Fahey, C. D. and P. C. Zee (2006). "Circadian rhythm sleep disorders and phototherapy." Psychiatr Clin North Am 29(4): 989-1007; abstract ix.
	Circadian rhythm sleep disorders are characterized by a desynchronization between the timing of the intrinsic circadian clock and the extrinsic light-dark and social/activity cycles resulting in symptoms of excessive sleepiness and insomnia. This article explores the six recognized circadian rhythm sleep disorders: delayed sleep phase syndrome, advanced sleep phase syndrome, non-24-hour sleep-wake syndrome, irregular sleep-wake pattern, shift work sleep syndrome, and time zone change syndrome. Additionally discussed are the therapeutic roles of synchronizing agents, such as light and melatonin.

Falck, R. S., et al. (2020). "Effect of a Multimodal Lifestyle Intervention on Sleep and Cognitive Function in Older Adults with Probable Mild Cognitive Impairment and Poor Sleep: A Randomized Clinical Trial." J Alzheimers Dis 76(1): 179-193.
	BACKGROUND: Poor sleep is common among older adults with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and may contribute to further cognitive decline. Whether multimodal lifestyle intervention that combines bright light therapy (BLT), physical activity (PA), and good sleep hygiene can improve sleep in older adults with MCI and poor sleep is unknown. OBJECTIVE: To assess the effect of a multimodal lifestyle intervention on sleep in older adults with probable MCI and poor sleep. METHODS: This was a 24-week proof-of-concept randomized trial of 96 community-dwelling older adults aged 65-85 years with probable MCI (<26/30 on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment) and poor sleep (>5 on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index [PSQI]). Participants were allocated to either a multimodal lifestyle intervention (INT); or 2) education + attentional control (CON). INT participants received four once-weekly general sleep hygiene education classes, followed by 20-weeks of: 1) individually-timed BLT; and 2) individually-tailored PA promotion. Our primary outcome was sleep efficiency measured using the MotionWatch8© (MW8). Secondary outcomes were MW8-measured sleep duration, fragmentation index, wake-after-sleep-onset, latency, and PSQI-measured subjective sleep quality. RESULTS: There were no significant between-group differences in MW8 measured sleep efficiency at 24-weeks (estimated mean difference [INT -CON]: 1.18%; 95% CI [-0.99, 3.34]), or any other objective-estimate of sleep. However, INT participants reported significantly better subjective sleep quality at 24-weeks (estimated mean difference: -1.39; 95% CI [-2.72, -0.06]) compared to CON. CONCLUSION: Among individuals with probable MCI and poor sleep, a multimodal lifestyle intervention improves subjective sleep quality, but not objectively estimated sleep.

Falck, R. S., et al. (2018). "Buying time: a proof-of-concept randomized controlled trial to improve sleep quality and cognitive function among older adults with mild cognitive impairment." Trials 19(1): 445.
	BACKGROUND: Current evidence suggests that good quality sleep is associated with preserved cognitive function and reduced dementia risk in older adults. Sleep complaints are especially common among older adults with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and this may contribute to their increased risk for progression to dementia. Thus, improving their sleep may be important for maintaining their cognitive health. Chronotherapy is a set of intervention strategies that can improve sleep quality through strengthening the entrainment of the biological clock to the solar light-dark cycle, and includes strategies such as (1) bright light therapy (BLT); (2) physical activity (PA); and (3) good sleep hygiene. Of these strategies, BLT is the most potent and is based on providing individualized timing to entrain circadian rhythms. Thus, a personalized chronotherapy intervention of individually timed BLT and individually tailored PA promotion, in conjunction with general sleep hygiene education may promote older adult sleep quality. We therefore aim to carry out a proof-of-concept randomized controlled trial (RCT) to examine the efficacy of such a personalized chronotherapy intervention to improve sleep quality among older adults with MCI. METHODS/DESIGN: This was a 24-week RCT of a personalized chronotherapy intervention aimed to primarily improve sleep quality as measured by the MotionWatch8©. Participants in the personalized chronotherapy group (INT) will receive four once-weekly, general sleep hygiene education classes, followed by 20 weeks of (1) individually timed BLT and (2) bi-weekly, individually tailored PA counseling phone calls in conjunction with receiving a consumer-available PA tracker-the Fitbit® Flex™. Ninety-six adults (aged 65-85 years) classified as having MCI (i.e., Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) ≥ 24; Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) ≤ 26; without dementia or significant functional impairment) will be randomized to either INT or a waitlist control group (CON). DISCUSSION: The results of this trial will help determine if a personalized chronotherapy intervention that includes individually timed BLT and individually tailored PA promotion, along with general sleep hygiene education can promote sleep quality among older adults at increased risk for dementia. Our results will help inform best practices for promoting sleep quality among older adults with MCI. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov , NCT02926157 . Registered on 6 October 2016.

Fargason, R. E., et al. (2017). "Correcting delayed circadian phase with bright light therapy predicts improvement in ADHD symptoms: A pilot study." J Psychiatr Res 91: 105-110.
	Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common condition with comorbid insomnia reported in >70% of children and adults. These patients demonstrate delays in sleep-wake rhythms, nocturnal rise in melatonin, and early morning rise in cortisol. Given that standard psychopharmacologic treatments for ADHD often do not completely control symptoms in participants with circadian rhythm delay, we sought to test whether bright light therapy (BLT) advances circadian rhythms and further reduces ADHD symptoms over standard treatments. In addition to standard of care, participants with ADHD diagnosis underwent 1 week of baseline assessment followed by 2-weeks of 30-min morning 10,000-lux BLT beginning 3 h after mid-sleep time. Participants minimized overhead light after 4 p.m., wore an actigraphy watch, and recorded BLT time on daily sleep logs. Dim Light Melatonin Onset (DLMO) was assessed at baseline and after 2-week treatment. ADHD symptoms were measured by the ADHD-Rating Scales (ADHD-RS). BLT significantly advanced the phase of DLMO by 31 min [mean time (SEM), 20:36 (0:21) advanced to 20:05 (0:20)] and mid-sleep time by 57 min [4:37 (0:22) advanced to 3:40 (0:16); paired t-tests, p = 0.002 and 0.004, respectively). Phase advances (in DLMO or mid-sleep time) were significantly correlated with decreased ADHD-RS total scores (p = 0.027 and 0.044) and Hyperactive-Impulsive sub-scores (p = 0.014 and 0.013, respectively). Actigraphy analysis for a subset of 8 participants with significant DLMO phase advance revealed no significant changes in total sleep time, sleep efficiency, wake after sleep onset, or percent wake during sleep interval. This is the first successful use of BLT for advancing melatonin phase and improving ADHD symptoms in adults. BLT may be a complementary treatment for both delayed sleep timing and ADHD symptoms in adults.

Faulkner, S. M., et al. (2019). "Light therapies to improve sleep in intrinsic circadian rhythm sleep disorders and neuro-psychiatric illness: A systematic review and meta-analysis." Sleep Med Rev 46: 108-123.
	Circadian dysregulation causes sleep disturbance and impacts quality of life and functioning. Some interventions target circadian entrainment through modifying light exposure, but existing reviews of light interventions for sleep improvement include few studies in psychiatric populations. We examined effect of light interventions on sleep quality, duration and timing, and effect moderators. We included controlled studies in intrinsic circadian rhythm disorders (such as advanced or delayed sleep) and in neuropsychiatric disorders with assumed high prevalence of circadian dysregulation (such as affective and psychotic disorders). Articles were identified through database searching: 40 studies reporting 49 relevant intervention comparisons met inclusion criteria. Meta-analysis showed improvements in sleep continuity (ES = -0.23, p = 0.000), self-reported sleep disturbance (ES = -0.32, p = 0.014), and advancement of delayed sleep timing (ES = -0.34, p = 0.010). Although the small number of studies limited meta-regression, evening light avoidance was associated with greater increase in total sleep time. Effects of light on sleep and circadian outcomes have received limited attention in studies in psychiatric disorders, but results were promising in these groups. These findings invite further refinement and testing of light interventions to improve sleep in psychiatric disorders, with improved assessment and specification of problems, and the development and implementation of light schedule interventions for delayed sleep.

Ferini-Strambi, L., et al. (2020). "Therapy for Insomnia and Circadian Rhythm Disorder in Alzheimer Disease." Curr Treat Options Neurol 22(2): 4.
	PURPOSE OF THE REVIEW: There is strong evidence for a bidirectional association between sleep disorders and Alzheimer's disease (AD). In particular, insomnia may be a potentially modifiable risk factor for AD. The present review summarizes recent advances in treatment of sleep disorders in AD. RECENT FINDINGS: Some studies investigated the efficacy and safety of hypnotic agents as ramelteon and mirtazapine to treat sleep disorders in AD but no significant therapeutic effects have been observed. Benzodiazepines are the most frequently used medication for treatment of insomnia but they may cause significant side effects in old subjects. Suvorexant, an orexin receptor antagonist, showed a positive effect on AD insomnia. Recent report suggests an association between trazodone use and delayed cognitive decline in AD. With respect to circadian rhythm disorders, non-pharmacological treatments, especially bright light therapy, could be useful and safe options for treatment in AD. Some pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments might have benefits in AD patients with sleep disturbances, but further well-designed controlled trials are needed.

Fetveit, A. and B. Bjorvatn (2005). "[Bright light treatment against sleep disturbances in nursing homes--a non-pharmacological alternative]." Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen 125(12): 1679-1681.
	BACKGROUND: Age-related sleep disturbances may be caused by changes in the circadian rhythm, either by phase shifting and/or by a reduction of its amplitude. This may result in less nocturnal sleep and less wakefulness during the day. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The article is based on our own research and on relevant studies and reviews in this field. RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION: Bright light treatment may alter the phase and strengthen the existing circadian rhythm in patients with insomnia, thus creating a clearer distinction between night and day. It is reported that bright light treatment in the morning for patients with dementia may improve sleep maintenance.

Figueiro, M. G. (2015). "Individually tailored light intervention through closed eyelids to promote circadian alignment and sleep health." Sleep Health 1(1): 75-82.
	BACKGROUND: Light is most effective at changing the timing of the circadian clock when applied close to the core body temperature minimum. The present study investigated, in a home setting, if individually tailored light treatment using flashing blue light delivered through closed eyelids during the early part of the sleep period delayed circadian phase and sleep in a population of healthy older adults and in those suffering from early awakening insomnia. METHODS: Twenty-eight participants (9 early awakening insomniacs) completed an 8-week, within-subjects study. Twice, participants collected data during two baseline weeks and one intervention week. During the intervention week, participants wore a flashing blue (active) or a flashing red (control) light mask during sleep. Light was expected to delay circadian phase. Saliva samples for dim light melatonin onset (DLMO) were collected at the end of each baseline and intervention week. Wrist actigraphy and Daysimeter, a calibrated light and activity meter, data were collected during the entire study. RESULTS: Compared to baseline, flashing blue light, but not flashing red light, significantly (p<0.05) delayed DLMO. The mean ± standard deviation phase shift (minutes) was 0:06 ± 0:30 for the flashing red light and 0:34 ± 0:30 for the flashing blue light. Compared to Day 1, sleep start times were significantly delayed (by approximately 46 minutes) at Day 7 after the flashing blue light. The light intervention did not affect sleep efficiency. CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated the feasibility of using light through closed eyelids during sleep for promoting circadian alignment and sleep health.

Figueiro, M. G., et al. (2009). "A personal light-treatment device for improving sleep quality in the elderly: dynamics of nocturnal melatonin suppression at two exposure levels." Chronobiol Int 26(4): 726-739.
	Light treatment has been used as a non-pharmacological tool to help mitigate poor sleep quality frequently found in older people. In order to increase compliance to non-pharmacological light treatments, new, more efficacious light-delivery systems need to be developed. A prototype personal light-treatment device equipped with low brightness blue light-emitting diodes (LEDs) (peak wavelength near 470 nm) was tested for its effectiveness in suppressing nocturnal melatonin, a measure of circadian stimulation. Two levels of corneal irradiance were set to deliver two prescribed doses of circadian light exposure. Eleven older subjects, between 51 and 80 yrs of age who met the selection criteria, were exposed to a high and a low level of light for 90 min on separate nights from the personal light-treatment device. Blood and saliva samples were collected at prescribed times for subsequent melatonin assay. After 1 h of light exposure, the light-induced nocturnal melatonin suppression level was about 35% for the low-light level and about 60% for the high-light level. The higher level of blue light suppressed melatonin more quickly, to a greater extent over the course of the 90 min exposure period, and maintained suppression after 60 min. The constant exposure of the low-light level resulted in a decrease in nocturnal melatonin suppression for the last sampling time, whereas for the high-light level, suppression continued throughout the entire exposure period. The present study performed with healthy adults suggests that the tested personal light-treatment device might be a practical, comfortable, and effective way to deliver light treatment to those suffering from circadian sleep disorders; however, the acceptance and effectiveness of personal light-treatment devices by older people and by other segments of the population suffering from sleep disorders in a real-life situation need to be directly tested.

Figueiro, M. G., et al. (2019). "Effects of a Tailored Lighting Intervention on Sleep Quality, Rest-Activity, Mood, and Behavior in Older Adults With Alzheimer Disease and Related Dementias: A Randomized Clinical Trial." J Clin Sleep Med 15(12): 1757-1767.
	STUDY OBJECTIVES: We investigated the effectiveness of a lighting intervention tailored to maximally affect the circadian system as a nonpharmacological therapy for treating problems with sleep, mood, and behavior in persons with Alzheimer disease and related dementias (ADRD). METHODS: This 14-week randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover design clinical trial administered an all-day active or control lighting intervention to 46 patients with ADRD in 8 long-term care facilities for two 4-week periods (separated by a 4-week washout). The study employed wrist-worn actigraphy measures and standardized measures of sleep quality, mood, and behavior. RESULTS: The active intervention significantly improved Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index scores compared to the active baseline and control intervention (mean ± SEM: 6.67 ± 0.48 after active intervention, 10.30 ± 0.40 at active baseline, 8.41 ± 0.47 after control intervention). The active intervention also resulted in significantly greater active versus control differences in intradaily variability. As for secondary outcomes, the active intervention resulted in significant improvements in Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia scores (mean ± SEM: 10.30 ± 1.02 at baseline, 7.05 ± 0.67 after active intervention) and significantly greater active versus control differences in Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory scores (mean ± SEM: -5.51 ± 1.03 for the active intervention, -1.50 ± 1.24 for the control intervention). CONCLUSIONS: A lighting intervention tailored to maximally entrain the circadian system can improve sleep, mood, and behavior in patients with dementia living in controlled environments. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Registry: ClinicalTrials.gov, title: Methodology Issues in a Tailored Light Treatment for Persons With Dementia, URL: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01816152, identifier: NCT01816152.

Figueiro, M. G., et al. (2014). "Tailored lighting intervention improves measures of sleep, depression, and agitation in persons with Alzheimer's disease and related dementia living in long-term care facilities." Clin Interv Aging 9: 1527-1537.
	BACKGROUND: Light therapy has shown great promise as a nonpharmacological method to improve symptoms associated with Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD), with preliminary studies demonstrating that appropriately timed light exposure can improve nighttime sleep efficiency, reduce nocturnal wandering, and alleviate evening agitation. Since the human circadian system is maximally sensitive to short-wavelength (blue) light, lower, more targeted lighting interventions for therapeutic purposes, can be used. METHODS: The present study investigated the effectiveness of a tailored lighting intervention for individuals with ADRD living in nursing homes. Low-level "bluish-white" lighting designed to deliver high circadian stimulation during the daytime was installed in 14 nursing home resident rooms for a period of 4 weeks. Light-dark and rest-activity patterns were collected using a Daysimeter. Sleep time and sleep efficiency measures were obtained using the rest-activity data. Measures of sleep quality, depression, and agitation were collected using standardized questionnaires, at baseline, at the end of the 4-week lighting intervention, and 4 weeks after the lighting intervention was removed. RESULTS: The lighting intervention significantly (P<0.05) decreased global sleep scores from the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, and increased total sleep time and sleep efficiency. The lighting intervention also increased phasor magnitude, a measure of the 24-hour resonance between light-dark and rest-activity patterns, suggesting an increase in circadian entrainment. The lighting intervention significantly (P<0.05) reduced depression scores from the Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia and agitation scores from the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory. CONCLUSION: A lighting intervention, tailored to increase daytime circadian stimulation, can be used to increase sleep quality and improve behavior in patients with ADRD. The present field study, while promising for application, should be replicated using a larger sample size and perhaps using longer treatment duration.

Figueiro, M. G., et al. (2020). "Long-Term, All-Day Exposure to Circadian-Effective Light Improves Sleep, Mood, and Behavior in Persons with Dementia." J Alzheimers Dis Rep 4(1): 297-312.
	BACKGROUND: Persons with Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD) frequently experience sleep-wake (circadian) cycle disturbances that lead them to remain awake at night, causing stress and fatigue for families and caregivers. Light therapy shows promise as a nonpharmacological treatment for regulating sleep in this population. OBJECTIVE: We investigated the long-term impact of a circadian-effective lighting intervention on sleep, mood, and behavior problems in persons with ADRD. METHODS: This 25-week clinical trial administered an all-day lighting intervention to 47 patients with ADRD in 9 senior-care facilities, employing wrist-worn actigraphy measures and standardized measures of sleep quality, mood, and behavior. RESULTS: The intervention significantly improved Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index scores, from an estimated mean±SEM of 11.89±0.53 at baseline to 5.36±0.63 at the end of the intervention. Additional improvements were noted for sleep efficiency data from actigraph measurements. The intervention significantly reduced Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia scores (mean±SEM of 11.36±0.74 at baseline and 4.18±0.88 at the end of the intervention) and Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory scores (mean±SEM of 47.10±1.98 at baseline and 35.33±2.23 at the end of the intervention). CONCLUSION: A regular circadian-effective daytime lighting intervention can improve sleep at night and reduce depression and agitation in patients with dementia living in controlled environments. More importantly, the positive effects of the tailored lighting intervention on these outcomes appear to be cumulative over time.

Flo, E., et al. (2012). "Shift work disorder in nurses--assessment, prevalence and related health problems." PLoS One 7(4): e33981.
	BACKGROUND: This study investigates the prevalence of symptoms of shift work disorder in a sample of nurses, and its association to individual, health and work variables. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We investigated three different shift work disorder assessment procedures all based on current diagnostic criteria and employing symptom based questions. Crude and adjusted logistic regression analyses were performed with symptoms of shift work disorder as the dependent variable. Participants (n = 1968) reported age, gender, work schedule, commuting time, weekly work hours, children in household, number of nights and number of shifts separated by less than 11 hours worked the last year, use of bright light therapy, melatonin and sleep medication, and completed the Bergen Insomnia Scale, Epworth Sleepiness Scale, Global Sleep Assessment Questionnaire, Diurnal Scale, Revised Circadian Type Inventory, Dispositional Resilience (Hardiness) Scale--Revised, Fatigue Questionnaire, questions about alcohol and caffeine consumption, as well as the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale. CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Prevalence rates of symptoms of shift work disorder varied from 32.4-37.6% depending on the assessment method and from 4.8-44.3% depending on the work schedule. Associations were found between symptoms of shift work disorder and age, gender, circadian type, night work, number of shifts separated by less than 11 hours and number of nights worked the last year, insomnia and anxiety. The different assessment procedures yielded similar results (prevalence and logistic regression analyses). The prevalence of symptoms indicative of shift work disorder was high. We argue that three symptom-based questions used in the present study adequately assess shift work disorder in epidemiological studies.

Fontana Gasio, P., et al. (2003). "Dawn-dusk simulation light therapy of disturbed circadian rest-activity cycles in demented elderly." Exp Gerontol 38(1-2): 207-216.
	We investigated whether low intensity dawn-dusk simulation (DDS), a 'naturalistic' form of light therapy designed to embed sleep in its accustomed phase, could improve the disturbed circadian rest-activity cycle, nocturnal sleep and and/or cognitive functions in dementia. A protocol of 3 weeks each of baseline, treatment and follow-up was completed by 13 patients (85yr old+/-5yr, MMSE 14+/-5; n=9 DDS versus n=4 'placebo' dim red light) who wore an activity/lux monitor throughout. There were no significant changes in clinical or cognitive status, nor modification of circadian stability or amplitude characteristics of the rest-activity cycle. However, two aspects of sleep responded to DDS but not to dim red light. The main sleep episode was 1:14h earlier during treatment (p=0.03) compared with before and after DDS. With respect to actimetry-determined sleep variables, the DDS group tended to have shortened 'sleep latency', longer 'sleep duration', more nocturnal immobility and less nocturnal activity than the dim red group (p<0.1). In parallel, nighttime light exposure tended to be reduced (p=0.07). These promising findings-after only 3 weeks of light treatment in elderly patients with advanced dementia-suggest that the circadian timing system remains functionally responsive even to low intensity DDS light. Increasing zeitgeber strength is an important strategy for improving sleep quality and timing in dementia, and DDS light therapy may provide one of the appropriate means to do so.

Formentin, C., et al. (2020). "Effect of Morning Light Glasses and Night Short-Wavelength Filter Glasses on Sleep-Wake Rhythmicity in Medical Inpatients." Front Physiol 11: 5.
	Sleep and circadian rhythm disorders are common amongst medical inpatients. They are caused by a mixture of factors, including noise, loss of habitual daily routines, and abnormal exposure to light, which tends to be insufficient in the day and too high at night. The aim of the present study was to test the efficacy of morning light therapy plus night short-wavelength filter glasses on sleep quality/timing, and sleepiness/mood over the daytime hours, in a group of well-characterized medical inpatients. Thirty-three inpatients were enrolled and randomized (2:1) to either treatment (n = 22; 13 males, 48.3 ± 13.3 years) or standard of care (n = 11; 8 males, 56.9 ± 12.9 years). On admission, all underwent a baseline assessment of sleep quality/timing and diurnal preference. During hospitalization they underwent monitoring of sleep quality/timing (sleep diaries and actigraphy), plus hourly assessment of sleepiness/mood during the daytime hours on one, standard day of hospitalization. Patients in the treatment arm were administered bright light through glasses immediately after awakening, and wore short-wavelength filter glasses in the evening hours. Treated and untreated patients were comparable in terms of demographics, disease severity/comorbidity, diurnal preference and pre-admission sleep quality/timing. During hospitalization, sleep diaries documented a trend for a lower number of night awakenings in treated compared to untreated patients (1.6 ± 0.8 vs. 2.4 ± 1.3, p = 0.057). Actigraphy documented significantly earlier day mode in treated compared to untreated patients (06:39 ± 00:35 vs. 07:44 ± 00:40, p = 0.008). Sleepiness during a standard day of hospitalization, recorded between 09:30 and 21:30, showed physiological variation in treated compared to untreated patients, who exhibited a more blunted profile. The level of sleepiness reported by treated patients was lower over the 09:30-14:30 interval, i.e., soon after light administration (interaction effect: F = 2.661; p = 0.026). Mood levels were generally higher in treated patients, with statistically significant differences over the 09:30-14:30 time interval, i.e., soon after light administration (treatment: F = 5.692, p = 0.026). In conclusion, treatment with morning bright light and short-wavelength filter glasses in the evening, which was well tolerated, showed positive results in terms of sleepiness/mood over the morning hours and a trend for decreased night awakenings.

Friedman, L., et al. (2012). "Brief morning light treatment for sleep/wake disturbances in older memory-impaired individuals and their caregivers." Sleep Med 13(5): 546-549.
	BACKGROUND: Scheduled exposure to bright light (phototherapy) has been used, with varying degrees of success, to treat sleep disruption in older individuals. Most of these studies have been done in institutional settings and have used several hours of daily light exposure. Such a regimen in the home setting may be untenable, especially when the individual with the sleep disruption has memory impairment and is being cared for by a family member. As such, we examined the effectiveness of a "user-friendly" phototherapy protocol that would be readily usable in the home environment. METHODS: We exposed a group of 54 older caregiver/care recipient dyads, in which the care recipient had memory impairment, to two weeks of morning bright light phototherapy. Dyads were exposed to either bright white (∼4200 lux) or dim red (∼90 lux) light for 30 min every day, starting within 30 min of rising. All subjects also received sleep hygiene therapy. Objective (actigraphy) and subjective measures of sleep and mood were obtained at baseline and at the end of the two weeks of phototherapy. RESULTS: In care recipients, actigraphy- and log-determined time in bed and total sleep time declined in the active condition (p<0.05, ANOVA); there was no corresponding change in subjective insomnia symptoms (p's>0.37, ANOVA). The decrease in the time in bed was associated with an earlier out of bed time in the morning (p<0.001, Pearson correlation). The decrease in the total sleep time was associated with a decrease in sleep efficiency (p<0.001, Pearson correlation) and an increase in wake after sleep onset (p<0.001, Pearson correlation). In caregivers, there were no differential changes in actigraphic measures of sleep (p's>0.05, ANOVA). Actigraphy-measured wake after sleep onset and sleep efficiency did, however, improve in both conditions, as did sleepiness, insomnia symptoms, and depressive symptomatology (p's<0.05, ANOVA). CONCLUSIONS: Exposure to this regimen of phototherapy diminished sleep in older individuals with memory impairments. Their caregivers, however, experienced an improvement in sleep and mood that appeared independent of the phototherapy and likely due to participation in this protocol or the sleep hygiene therapy.

Friedman, L., et al. (2009). "Scheduled bright light for treatment of insomnia in older adults." J Am Geriatr Soc 57(3): 441-452.
	OBJECTIVES: To determine whether bright light can improve sleep in older individuals with insomnia. DESIGN: Single-blind, placebo-controlled, 12-week, parallel-group randomized design comparing four treatment groups representing a factorial combination of two lighting conditions and two times of light administration. SETTING: At-home light treatment; eight office therapy sessions. PARTICIPANTS: Thirty-six women and fifteen men (aged 63.6+/-7.1) meeting primary insomnia criteria recruited from the community. INTERVENTION: A 12-week program of sleep hygiene and exposure to bright ( approximately 4,000 lux) or dim light ( approximately 65 lux) scheduled daily in the morning or evening for 45 minutes. MEASUREMENTS: Within-group changes were observed for subjective (sleep logs, questionnaires) and objective (actigraphy, polysomnography) sleep measures after morning or evening bright light. RESULTS: Within-group changes for subjective sleep measures after morning or evening bright light were not significantly different from those observed after exposure to scheduled dim light. Objective sleep changes (actigraphy, polysomnography) after treatment were not significantly different between the bright and dim light groups. Scheduled light exposure was able to shift the circadian phase predictably but was unrelated to changes in objective or subjective sleep measures. A polymorphism in CLOCK predicted morningness but did not moderate the effects of light on sleep. The phase angle between the circadian system (melatonin midpoint) and sleep (darkness) predicted the magnitude of phase delays, but not phase advances, engendered by bright light. CONCLUSION: Except for one subjective measure, scheduled morning or evening bright light effects were not different from those of scheduled dim light. Thus, support was not found for bright light treatment of older individuals with primary insomnia.

Gammack, J. K. (2008). "Light therapy for insomnia in older adults." Clin Geriatr Med 24(1): 139-149, viii.
	Exposure to bright light suppresses the production of melatonin and contributes to the regulation of the circadian rhythm. Because of environmental and medical conditions, older adults are less likely than younger adults to receive the prolonged, high intensity, daily bright light needed to promote a satisfactory sleep-wake cycle. The best available evidence for bright light therapy is in the management of seasonal affective disorder, which is relatively infrequent in the elderly population. For older adults with chronic insomnia, dementia, and nonseasonal depression, there is no consensus on the optimum treatment protocol for bright light therapy. However, in addition to sleep improvement, bright light therapy may be used to reduce unwanted behavioral and cognitive symptoms associated with dementia and depression in the elderly.

García-Corpas, J. P., et al. (2008). "[Light therapy: its effectiveness in treating insomnia in elderly patients]." Aten Primaria 40(2): 101-103.
	
Garland, S. N., et al. (2020). "Light therapy for insomnia symptoms in fatigued cancer survivors: a secondary analysis of a randomized controlled trial." Journal of Psychosocial Oncology Research and Practice 2(3): e27.
	Background: Cancer-related fatigue (CRF) and insomnia are highly comorbid. This association implies that treatment aimed at improving one may also simultaneously target the other. This secondary analysis examined whether severity of insomnia affects sleep outcomes in response to a light therapy intervention in cancer survivors with CRF. Methods: This 4-week trial recruited cancer survivors who met ICD-10 criteria for CRF. Participants were randomized to receive bright white light (BWL) or dim red light (DRL). Light devices were used daily for 30 minutes over 28 days. Participants completed the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) at baseline, weeks 2 and 4, and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, daily sleep diaries and actigraphy at baseline and week 4. ISI scores 0 to 14 represent no/mild symptoms and scores 15+ correspond to moderate-to-severe (clinically significant) insomnia symptoms. Results: Of the 81 participants (BWL: n = 42; DRL: n = 39), 49% had ISI scores ≥15 at baseline. There was a significant group-by-time interaction for insomnia severity (F[2, 75.55] = 4.15, P = .020) and sleep quality (F [1, 39.25] = 7.66, P = .009), favoring the BWL condition for those individuals with no or mild insomnia symptoms. In the moderate-to-severe group, there were time effects for insomnia severity and sleep quality, diary measured wake after sleep onset and sleep efficiency, and actigraphy measured wake after sleep onset and sleep efficiency; however, participants remained in the clinical range for insomnia symptoms on the ISI and poor sleep quality on the PSQI. Effect sizes were larger, regardless of intervention condition, in participants with moderate-to-severe insomnia symptoms. Conclusions: The severity of insomnia symptoms may impact sleep outcomes in response to a light therapy intervention in cancer survivors with clinical levels of fatigue, but light therapy alone does not appear to be adequate to produce clinically meaningful change in sleep outcomes. Trial registration number: Clinicaltrials.gov identifier NCT01780623.

Gartlehner, G., et al. (2015). "Second-generation antidepressants for preventing seasonal affective disorder in adults." Cochrane Database Syst Rev(11): Cd011268.
	BACKGROUND: Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a seasonal pattern of recurrent major depressive episodes that most commonly occurs during autumn or winter and remits in spring. The prevalence of SAD ranges from 1.5% to 9%, depending on latitude. The predictable seasonal aspect of SAD provides a promising opportunity for prevention. This review - one of four reviews on efficacy and safety of interventions to prevent SAD - focuses on second-generation antidepressants (SGAs). OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of second-generation antidepressants (in comparison with other SGAs, placebo, light therapy, melatonin or agomelatine, psychological therapies or lifestyle interventions) in preventing SAD and improving patient-centred outcomes among adults with a history of SAD. SEARCH METHODS: A search of the Specialised Register of the Cochrane Depression, Anxiety and Neuorosis Review Group (CCDANCTR) included all years to 11 August 2015. The CCDANCTR contains reports of randomised controlled trials derived from EMBASE (1974 to date), MEDLINE (1950 to date), PsycINFO (1967 to date) and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL). Furthermore, we searched the Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature, Web of Knowledge, The Cochrane Library and the Allied and Complementary Medicine Database (to 26 May 2014). We also conducted a grey literature search and handsearched the reference lists of included studies and pertinent review articles. SELECTION CRITERIA: For efficacy, we included randomised controlled trials on adults with a history of winter-type SAD who were free of symptoms at the beginning of the study. For adverse events, we planned to include non-randomised studies. Eligible studies compared an SGA versus another SGA, placebo, light therapy, psychological therapy, melatonin, agomelatine or lifestyle changes. We also intended to compare SGAs in combination with any of the comparator interventions versus the same comparator intervention as monotherapy. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors screened abstracts and full-text publications and assigned risk of bias ratings based on the Cochrane 'Risk of bias' tool. We resolved disagreements by consensus or by consultation with a third party. Two review authors independently extracted data and assessed risk of bias of included studies. When data were sufficient, we conducted random-effects (Mantel-Haenszel) meta-analyses. We assessed statistical heterogeneity by calculating the Chi(2) statistic and the Cochran Q. We used the I(2) statistic to estimate the magnitude of heterogeneity and examined potential sources of heterogeneity using sensitivity analysis or analysis of subgroups. We assessed publication bias by using funnel plots. However, given the small number of component studies in our meta-analyses, these tests have low sensitivity to detect publication bias. We rated the strength of the evidence using the system developed by the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) Working Group. MAIN RESULTS: We identified 2986 citations after de-duplication of search results and excluded 2895 records during title and abstract reviews. We assessed 91 full-text papers for inclusion in the review, of which four publications (on three RCTs) providing data from 1100 people met eligibility criteria for this review. All three RCTs had methodological limitations due to high attrition rates.Overall moderate-quality evidence indicates that bupropion XL is an efficacious intervention for prevention of recurrence of depressive episodes in patients with a history of SAD (risk ratio (RR) 0.56, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.44 to 0.72; three RCTs, 1100 participants). However, bupropion XL leads to greater risk of headaches (moderate-quality evidence), insomnia and nausea (both low-quality evidence) when compared with placebo. Numbers needed to treat for additional beneficial outcomes (NNTBs) vary by baseline risks. For a population with a yearly recurrence rate of 30%, the NNTB is 8 (95% CI 6 to 12). For populations with yearly recurrence rates of 40% and 50%, NNTBs are 6 (95% CI 5 to 9) and 5 (95% CI 4 to 7), respectively.We could find no studies on other SGAs and no studies comparing SGAs with other interventions of interest such as light therapy, psychological therapies, melatonin or agomelatine. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Available evidence indicates that bupropion XL is an effective intervention for prevention of recurrence of SAD. Nevertheless, even in a high-risk population, four of five patients will not benefit from preventive treatment with bupropion XL and will be at risk for harm. Clinicians need to discuss with patients advantages and disadvantages of preventive SGA treatment and might want to consider offering other potentially efficacious interventions, which might confer lower risk of adverse events. Given the lack of comparative evidence, the decision for or against initiating preventive treatment of SAD and the treatment selected should be strongly based on patient preferences.Future researchers need to assess the effectiveness and risk of harms of SGAs other than bupropion for prevention of SAD. Investigators also need to compare benefits and harms of pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions.

Gartlehner, G., et al. (2019). "Second-generation antidepressants for preventing seasonal affective disorder in adults." Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3(3): Cd011268.
	BACKGROUND: Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a seasonal pattern of recurrent major depressive episodes that most commonly occurs during autumn or winter and remits in spring. The prevalence of SAD ranges from 1.5% to 9%, depending on latitude. The predictable seasonal aspect of SAD provides a promising opportunity for prevention. This review - one of four reviews on efficacy and safety of interventions to prevent SAD - focuses on second-generation antidepressants (SGAs). OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy and safety of SGAs (in comparison with other SGAs, placebo, light therapy, melatonin or agomelatine, psychological therapies or lifestyle interventions) in preventing SAD and improving patient-centred outcomes among adults with a history of SAD. SEARCH METHODS: We searched Ovid MEDLINE (1950- ), Embase (1974- ), PsycINFO (1967- ) and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) to 19 June 2018. An earlier search of these databases was conducted via the Cochrane Common Mental Disorders Controlled Trial Register (CCMD-CTR) (all years to 11 August 2015). Furthermore, we searched the Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature, Web of Science, the Cochrane Library, the Allied and Complementary Medicine Database and international trial registers (to 19 June 2018). We also conducted a grey literature search and handsearched the reference lists of included studies and pertinent review articles. SELECTION CRITERIA: For efficacy, we included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) on adults with a history of winter-type SAD who were free of symptoms at the beginning of the study. For adverse events, we planned to include non-randomised studies. Eligible studies compared a SGA versus another SGA, placebo, light therapy, psychological therapy, melatonin, agomelatine or lifestyle changes. We also intended to compare SGAs in combination with any of the comparator interventions versus placebo or the same comparator intervention as monotherapy. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently screened abstracts and full-text publications, extracted data and assessed risk of bias of included studies. When data were sufficient, we conducted random-effects (Mantel-Haenszel) meta-analyses. We assessed statistical heterogeneity by calculating the Chi(2) statistic and the Cochran Q. We used the I(2) statistic to estimate the magnitude of heterogeneity. We assessed publication bias by using funnel plots.We rated the strength of the evidence using the system developed by the GRADE Working Group. MAIN RESULTS: We identified 3745 citations after de-duplication of search results and excluded 3619 records during title and abstract reviews. We assessed 126 full-text papers for inclusion in the review, of which four publications (on three RCTs) providing data from 1100 people met eligibility criteria for this review. All three RCTs had methodological limitations due to high attrition rates.Overall, moderate-quality evidence indicates that bupropion XL is an efficacious intervention for prevention of recurrence of depressive episodes in people with a history of SAD (risk ratio (RR) 0.56, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.44 to 0.72; 3 RCTs, 1100 participants). However, bupropion XL leads to greater risk of headaches (moderate-quality evidence), insomnia and nausea (both low-quality evidence) when compared with placebo. Numbers needed to treat for additional beneficial outcomes (NNTBs) vary by baseline risks. For a population with a yearly recurrence rate of 30%, the NNTB is 8 (95% CI 6 to 12). For populations with yearly recurrence rates of 50% and 60%, NNTBs are 5 (95% CI 4 to 7) and 4 (95% CI 3 to 6), respectively.We could find no studies on other SGAs and no studies comparing SGAs with other interventions of interest, such as light therapy, psychological therapies, melatonin or agomelatine. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Available evidence indicates that bupropion XL is an effective intervention for prevention of recurrence of SAD. Nevertheless, even in a high-risk population, three out of four people will not benefit from preventive treatment with bupropion XL and will be at risk for harm. Clinicians need to discuss with patients advantages and disadvantages of preventive SGA treatment, and might want to consider offering other potentially efficacious interventions, which might confer a lower risk of adverse events. Given the lack of comparative evidence, the decision for or against initiating preventive treatment of SAD and the treatment selected should be strongly based on patient preferences.Future researchers need to assess the effectiveness and risk of harms of SGAs other than bupropion for prevention of SAD. Investigators also need to compare benefits and harms of pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions.

Gentili, A. and J. D. Edinger (1999). "Sleep disorders in older people." Aging (Milano) 11(3): 137-141.
	Sleep complaints are common among older people. As there are often multiple contributing factors, insomnia should be considered a symptom, and not a diagnosis. There is a high prevalence of sleep apnea and nocturnal myoclonus. When these primary sleep disorders are suspected, the patient should be referred for polysomnography. Use of hypnotics should be discouraged for chronic insomnia. More research is needed to clarify the role of light therapy and melatonin in the treatment of sleep disorders in older people.

Geoffroy, P. A. and L. Palagini (2021). "Biological rhythms and chronotherapeutics in depression." Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 106: 110158.
	Depressive syndromes are frequent and heterogeneous brain conditions with more than 90% of patients suffering from sleep complaints. Better characterizing this "sleep" domain may allow to both better treat acute episodes with existing chronotherapeutics, but also to prevent the manifestation or recurrences of mood disorders. This work aims to i) review theoretical and fundamental data of chronotherapeutics, and ii) provide practical recommendations. Light therapy (LT) can be used as a first-line monotherapy of moderate to severe depression of all subtypes. LT can be also used as a combination with antidepressant to maximize patients' response rates, which has a clear superiority to antidepressant alone. Sleep deprivation (SD) is a rapid and powerful chronotherapeutic with antidepressant responses within hours in 45-60% of patients with unipolar or bipolar depression. Different strategies should be combined to stabilize the SD antidepressant effect, including concomitant medications, repeated SD, combination with sleep phase advance and/or LT (triple chronotherapy). Melatonin treatment is of interest in remitted patients with mood disorder to prevent relapses or recurrences, if a complaint of insomnia, poor sleep quality or phase delay syndrome is associated. During the acute phase, melatonin could be used as an adjuvant treatment for symptoms of insomnia associated with depression. The cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) can be recommend to treat insomnia during euthymic phases. The Interpersonal and social rhythm therapy (IPSRT) is indicated for the acute treatment of bipolar depression and for the prevention of mood episodes. Chronotherapeutics should always be associated with behavioral measures for healthy sleep.

Gest, S., et al. (2016). "Chronotherapeutic treatments for depression in youth." Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 25(2): 151-161.
	Chronotherapeutics such as wake therapy and bright light therapy are well-established methods in treating adults with depressive disorders and are additionally beneficent for sleep regulation. Few studies concerning chronotherapeutics in juvenile depression exist, though the established treatments are insufficient and sleep disorders often co-occur. In this study, we investigate the impact of two types of chronotherapeutics on depressive symptoms and sleep behavior in a juvenile setting. Juvenile inpatients (n = 62) with moderate to severe depressive symptoms took part in either a combined setting consisting of one night wake therapy followed by 2 weeks bright light therapy or in a setting of bright light therapy alone. Depressive symptoms, general psychopathology, clinical impression and sleep behavior were measured before (T1), directly after (T2) and 2 weeks after intervention (T3). Depressive symptoms decreased while sleep quality increased in both groups. The bright light therapy alone group showed further improvement at T3 in regards to depressive symptoms. Correlation analyses indicated significant negative correlations between sleep quality and awaking after restorative sleep with the depressive symptoms. However, only awaking after restorative sleep had a predictive impact on treatment outcome. The present study provides first evidence for a positive impact of chronotherapeutic interventions on treatment outcome in depressed juvenile inpatients. Bright light therapy seems to stabilize and further enhance reduction of depressive symptoms during follow-up, whereas one night wake therapy does not have an additional long-lasting impact on depressive symptoms and sleep parameters.

Ghani, H., et al. (2021). "The Psychosocial Burden Associated With and Effective Treatment Approach for Atopic Dermatitis: A Literature Review." J Drugs Dermatol 20(10): 1046-1050.
	Atopic Dermatitis (AD) is chronic relapsing inflammatory skin condition that is marked by a high degree of psychosocial and emotional burden in both pediatric and adult populations. In addition to physical symptoms of pruritus and visible skin lesions, AD is associated with decreased quality of life, psychosocial stress, low self-esteem, low work productivity, irritability, decreased physical intimacy, disturbed sleep, depression, anxiety, and suicidal ideation. Since AD is a chronic disease, treatment includes achieving long-term disease control for noticeable symptom reduction. For mild symptoms of AD, dermatologists should recommend basic skin care maintenance, use of emollients, and avoidance of triggers. If that fails, treatment with TCS, TCIs, phototherapy, and systemic immunosuppressants is generally advised. Dupilumab is the most effective immunomodulating therapy available for treating moderate-to-severe symptoms associated with AD, including itching, poor sleep quality, anxiety, and depression. Topical agents and phototherapy have been shown to be less efficacious and more suited for achieving remission in mild-to-moderate disease. Overall, the treatment of emotional and psychosocial factors linked with moderate to severe AD remains challenging and calls for more research. The purpose of our review is to explore the extent and severity of psychosocial and emotional burden that patients with atopic dermatitis may potentially experience, and list up-to-date treatment choices available for symptoms associated with AD. J Drugs Dermatol. 2021;20(10): 1046-1050.doi:10.36849/JDD.6328.

Gökben Hizli, F. and M. Yücel Ağargün (2009). "[Delayed sleep phase type sleep disorder and chronotherapy]." Turk Psikiyatri Derg 20(2): 183-187.
	Delayed sleep phase type sleep disorder is a circadian rhythm disorder that results in symptoms of sleep-onset insomnia and difficulty awakening at a desired time. Patients with delayed sleep phase-type sleep disorder can be treated with chronotherapy, light therapy, vitamin B12, or melatonin. Chronotherapy is a behavioral technique in which sleep time is systematically delayed. Herein we report a 48-year-old woman that presented with delayed sleep onset and describe chronotherapy as a treatment approach.

Gomes, J. N., et al. (2021). "Light therapy for the treatment of delayed sleep-wake phase disorder in adults: a systematic review." Sleep Sci 14(2): 155-163.
	Delayed sleep-wake phase disorder (DSWPD) is characterized by sleep onset times, beyond the usual schedules and social conveniences, which potentially impacts on health as well as on school and professional performance. The most common treatment for DSWPD is the light administration (light therapy), through light devices, with or without behavioral instructions. Since there is no consensus in the literature about its efficacy and how it should be processed, this study aims to evaluate the light therapy effectiveness in the delayed sleep-wake phase disorder therapeutics. A systematic review was conducted using the MEDLINE/PubMed, Virtual Health Library Brazil, PsycINFO, Web of Science and Scopus databases along with a hand search until September 2020. The included studies presented participants diagnosed with insomnia or DSWPD, over 18-years old, treated only with morning light therapy, mentioning the light intensity (lux) used, and investigations with a control group. Studies reporting individuals with neurological or psychiatric disorders, shift-workers, or evaluating other sleep disorders were excluded. Among the 411 studies identified, five were selected for this review, resulting in a total sample of 140 individuals. Only two studies produced long-term results, showing that the benefits did not persist. In most studies, there were no statistically significant differences in the variables when comparing the intervention group and the control group. However, there were substantial clinical and laboratory advances in the sleep phase using light therapy when comparing phase advances for the same group concerning baseline values of sleep variables.

Gooley, J. J. (2008). "Treatment of circadian rhythm sleep disorders with light." Ann Acad Med Singap 37(8): 669-676.
	The human circadian system is normally synchronised with the solar day, insuring that alertness and performance peak during daytime hours and consolidated sleep occurs during the night. In circadian rhythm sleep disorders, the pattern of sleep-wake is misaligned with the patient's circadian system or the external environment, resulting in insomnia, fatigue, and deterioration in performance. Appropriately-timed exposure to bright light can reset the timing of sleep and wake to the desired times, and improve sleep quality and daytime alertness. The efficacy of bright light therapy, however, is dependent on the time-of-day of the circadian cycle that the light is administered. In this article, we examine the physiological basis for bright light therapy, and we discuss the application of light in the treatment of circadian rhythm sleep disorders including advanced and delayed sleep-phase disorder, free-running disorder (nonentrained type), shiftwork disorder and jet lag disorder. We review the laboratory and field studies which have established bright light therapy as an effective treatment for sleep-wake and circadian misalignment, and we also provide guidelines for the appropriate timing and safe use of bright light therapy.

Gottlieb, J. F., et al. (2019). "The chronotherapeutic treatment of bipolar disorders: A systematic review and practice recommendations from the ISBD task force on chronotherapy and chronobiology." Bipolar Disord 21(8): 741-773.
	AIMS: To systematically review the literature on the efficacy and tolerability of the major chronotherapeutic treatments of bipolar disorders (BD)-bright light therapy (LT), dark therapy (DT), treatments utilizing sleep deprivation (SD), melatonergic agonists (MA), interpersonal social rhythm therapy (IPSRT), and cognitive behavioral therapy adapted for BD (CBTI-BP)-and propose treatment recommendations based on a synthesis of the evidence. METHODS: PRISMA-based systematic review of the literature. RESULTS: The acute antidepressant (AD) efficacy of LT was supported by several open-label studies, three randomized controlled trials (RCTs), and one pseudorandomized controlled trial. SD showed rapid, acute AD response rates of 43.9%, 59.3%, and 59.4% in eight case series, 11 uncontrolled, studies, and one RCT, respectively. Adjunctive DT obtained significant, rapid anti-manic results in one RCT and one controlled study. The seven studies on MA yielded very limited data on acute antidepressant activity, conflicting evidence of both antimanic and maintenance efficacy, and support from two case series of improved sleep in both acute and euthymic states. IPSRT monotherapy for bipolar II depression had acute response rates of 41%, 67%, and 67.4% in two open studies and one RCT, respectively; as adjunctive therapy for bipolar depression in one RCT, and efficacy in reducing relapse in two RCTs. Among euthymic BD subjects with insomnia, a single RCT found CBTI-BP effective in delaying manic relapse and improving sleep. Chronotherapies were generally safe and well-tolerated. CONCLUSIONS: The outcome literature on the adjunctive use of chronotherapeutic treatments for BP is variable, with evidence bases that differ in size, study quality, level of evidence, and non-standardized treatment protocols. Evidence-informed practice recommendations are offered.

Gradisar, M., et al. (2011). "A randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behavior therapy plus bright light therapy for adolescent delayed sleep phase disorder." Sleep 34(12): 1671-1680.
	OBJECTIVE: To evaluate cognitive-behavior therapy plus bright light therapy (CBT plus BLT) for adolescents diagnosed with delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD). DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial of CBT plus BLT vs. waitlist (WL) control with comparisons at pre- and post-treatment. There was 6-month follow-up for the CBT plus BLT group only. SETTING: Flinders University Child & Adolescent Sleep Clinic, Adelaide, South Australia. PATIENTS: 49 adolescents (mean age 14.6 ± 1.0 y, 53% males) diagnosed with DSPD; mean chronicity 4 y 8 months; 16% not attending school. Eighteen percent of adolescents dropped out of the study (CBT plus BLT: N = 23 vs. WL: N = 17). INTERVENTIONS: CBT plus BLT consisted of 6 individual sessions, including morning bright light therapy to advance adolescents' circadian rhythms, and cognitive restructuring and sleep education to target associated insomnia and sleep hygiene. MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: DSPD diagnosis was performed via a clinical interview and 7-day sleep diary. Measurements at each time-point included online sleep diaries and scales measuring sleepiness, fatigue, and depression symptoms. Compared to WL, moderate-to-large improvements (d = 0.65-1.24) were found at post-treatment for CBT plus BLT adolescents, including reduced sleep latency, earlier sleep onset and rise times, total sleep time (school nights), wake after sleep onset, sleepiness, and fatigue. At 6-month follow-up (N = 15), small-to-large improvements (d = 0.24-1.53) continued for CBT plus BLT adolescents, with effects found for all measures. Significantly fewer adolescents receiving CBT plus BLT met DPSD criteria at post-treatment (WL = 82% vs. CBT plus BLT = 13%, P < 0.0001), yet 13% still met DSPD criteria at the 6-month follow-up. CONCLUSIONS: CBT plus BLT for adolescent DSPD is effective for improving multiple sleep and daytime impairments in the immediate and long-term. Studies evaluating the treatment effectiveness of each treatment component are needed. CLINICAL TRIAL INFORMATION: Australia-New Zealand Trials Registry Number: ACTRN12610001041044.

Griepentrog, J. E., et al. (2018). "Bright environmental light improves the sleepiness of nightshift ICU nurses." Crit Care 22(1): 295.
	BACKGROUND: Shift work can disturb circadian homeostasis and result in fatigue, excessive sleepiness, and reduced quality of life. Light therapy has been shown to impart positive effects in night shift workers. We sought to determine whether or not prolonged exposure to bright light during a night shift reduces sleepiness and enhances psychomotor performance among ICU nurses. METHODS: This is a single-center randomized, crossover clinical trial at a surgical trauma ICU. ICU nurses working a night shift were exposed to a 10-h period of high illuminance (1500-2000 lx) white light compared to standard ambient fluorescent lighting of the hospital. They then completed the Stanford Sleepiness Scale and the Psychomotor Vigilance Test. The primary and secondary endpoints were analyzed using the paired t test. A p value <0.05 was considered significant. RESULTS: A total of 43 matched pairs completed both lighting exposures and were analyzed. When exposed to high illuminance lighting subjects experienced reduced sleepiness scores on the Stanford Sleepiness Scale than when exposed to standard hospital lighting: mean (sem) 2.6 (0.2) vs. 3.0 (0.2), p = 0.03. However, they committed more psychomotor errors: 2.3 (0.2) vs. 1.7 (0.2), p = 0.03. CONCLUSIONS: A bright lighting environment for ICU nurses working the night shift reduces sleepiness but increases the number of psychomotor errors. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03331822 . Retrospectively registered on 6 November 2017.

Guichard, K., et al. (2021). "Sleep deprivation therapy to reset the circadian pacemaker in a non-24-hour sleep-wake disorder: a case report." J Clin Sleep Med 17(7): 1503-1506.
	Non-24-hour sleep-wake disorder is 1 of several chronic circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders. It is defined as progressive daily shifts in sleep onset and wake times. It mainly affects patients who are sight-impaired, is relatively rare in sighted patients, and is difficult to treat, with no guidelines. This case report discusses non-24-hour sleep-wake disorder in a sighted young man who complained of alternating severe insomnia and excessive sleepiness, with a sleep agenda and actigraphic data showing a daily delay of approximately 2 hours. A novel therapy by total sleep deprivation followed by a combination of morning light therapy and nocturnal melatonin administration was efficient in stopping his free-running sleep-wake pattern both immediately and in the long term. The treatment combination for 6 months resulted in stable circadian entrainment to a 24-hour cycle. Compliance with chronotherapy was maintained over the course of follow-up.

Guidi, L., et al. (2023). "Non-Pharmacological Treatments in Lewy Body Disease: A Systematic Review." Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord: 1-16.
	INTRODUCTION: Lewy body disease (LBD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder in patients older than 65 years. LBD is characterized by heterogeneous symptoms like fluctuation in attention, visual hallucinations, Parkinsonism, and REM sleep behaviour disorders. Considering the relevant social impact of the disease, identifying effective non-pharmacological treatments is becoming a priority. The aim of this systematic review was to provide an up-to-date literature review of the most effective non-pharmacological treatments in patients with LBD, focussing on evidence-based interventions. METHODS: Following PRISMA criteria, we carried out a systematic search through three databases (PubMed, Cochrane Libraries, and PEDro) including physical therapy (PT), cognitive rehabilitation (CR), light therapy (LT), transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), deep brain stimulation (DBS). All studies were qualitatively assessed using standardized tools (CARE and EPHPP). RESULTS: We obtained a total of 1,220 studies of which 23 original articles met eligibility criteria for inclusion. The total number of LBD patients included was 231; mean age was 69.98, predominantly men (68%). Some PT studies highlighted improvements in motor deficits. CR produced significant improvements in mood, cognition, and patient's quality of life and satisfaction. LT outlined a partial trend of improvements in mood and sleep quality. DBS, ECT, and TMS showed some partial improvements mainly on neuropsychiatric symptoms, whereas tDCS provided partial improvements in attention. CONCLUSION: This review highlights the efficacy of some evidence-based rehabilitation studies in LBD; however, further randomized controlled trials with larger samples are needed to provide definitive recommendations.

Guilleminault, C., et al. (1995). "Nondrug treatment trials in psychophysiologic insomnia." Arch Intern Med 155(8): 838-844.
	BACKGROUND: Due to a variety of potential problems with long-term hypnotic use, patients and treating physicians often try to avoid drugs in the treatment of psychophysiologic insomnia and to use nondrug treatment strategies, but these treatments must bring relief within a limited amount of time to be acceptable to patients. METHOD: Thirty patients participated in the study. All had, for a minimum of 6 months, the complaint of less than 6 hours total sleep time per night in conjunction with either: (1) spending more than 30 minutes in bed before falling asleep, or (2) awakening during the night within 2 hours of sleep onset with difficulty returning to sleep. All subjects had the associated complaint of daytime impairment and none had used hypnotics for at least 3 months. Patients were randomly assigned to three parallel treatment groups: structured sleep hygiene, structured sleep hygiene with late afternoon moderate exercise, and structured sleep hygiene with early morning light therapy. Patients responded to questionnaires and filled out sleep logs. In addition, they underwent clinical evaluation, structured interviews, nocturnal monitoring, and actigraphy. The analyzed variables before and at the end of treatment were those derived from sleep logs and actigraphy. RESULTS: All subjects showed a trend toward improvement, independent of the treatment received, but only the "structured sleep hygiene with light treatment" showed statistically significant improvement at the end of the trial. CONCLUSIONS: Patients with chronic psychophysiologic insomnia may benefit from a nondrug treatment approach. Light therapy appears particularly promising.

Happe, S. (2011). "[Sleep and its disorders in the elderly]." Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz 54(12): 1311-1318.
	Restorative sleep is an important factor for preservation of health and quality of life. Sleep quality is associated with age, i.e., sleep disorders occur more frequently particularly after the age of 75 years. Furthermore, sleep shows an association with female gender, inactivity, dissatisfaction with social life, depressive symptoms, pain, intake of sedatives, genetic predisposition, and increased morbidity and mortality in the elderly. Strategies for improving sleep should include (1) effective treatment of organic diseases and mental disorders, (2) elimination of social life factors that impair sleep quality, (3) light therapy and other nonpharmacological treatment options for longer periods, and (4) short-term use of sleep medication as required. For the latter, it should be kept in mind that lower doses are needed in the elderly.

Hauri, P. J. (1998). "Insomnia." Clin Chest Med 19(1): 157-168.
	This article reviews issues involved in the diagnosis of insomnia and discusses treatment options, including pharmacologic treatment, which is indicated mainly in acute insomnia. Sleep hygiene is then discussed. Finally, the various behavioral treatments are reviewed, including light therapy, relaxation training, cognitive therapy, sleep curtailment, and stimulus control therapy.

He, A., et al. (2017). "Aprepitant for the Treatment of Chronic Refractory Pruritus." Biomed Res Int 2017: 4790810.
	Chronic pruritus is a difficult condition to treat and is associated with several comorbidities, including insomnia, depression, and decreased quality of life. Treatment for chronic itch includes corticosteroids, antihistamines, and systemic therapies such as naltrexone, gabapentin, UV light therapy, and immunomodulatory treatments, including azathioprine, methotrexate, and cellcept. However, some patients still remain refractory to conventional therapy. Aprepitant is a neurokinin-1 receptor antagonist approved for the prevention of chemotherapy-induced and postoperative nausea and vomiting (CINV, PONV). Recently, aprepitant has demonstrated effectiveness in several case series and open label trials in relieving pruritus for patients refractory to other treatments. Patients with pruritus associated with Sézary syndrome, mycosis fungoides, lung adenocarcinoma, breast carcinoma, sarcomas, metastatic solid tumors, chronic kidney disease, hyperuricemia, iron deficiency, brachioradial pruritus, and Hodgkin's lymphoma have experienced considerable symptom relief with short-term use of aprepitant (up to two weeks). Due to differences in reporting and evaluation of drug effects, the mechanism of aprepitant's role is difficult to understand based on the current literature. Herein, we evaluate aprepitant's antipruritic effects and discuss its mechanism of action and adverse effects. We propose that aprepitant is an alternative for patients suffering from pruritus who do not obtain enough symptom relief from conventional therapy.

He, X., et al. (2023). "Effectiveness of non-pharmacological interventions for sleep disturbances in people living with dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis." Geriatr Nurs 51: 76-83.
	We summarize the evidence on non-pharmacological interventions for sleep disturbances in people living with dementia(PlwD). A literature search was performed using PubMed, Embase, Cochrane library, Web of Science, PsycINFO, CINAHL, and clinicaltrials.gov. Up to August 20, 2022. Six studies met our eligibility criteria. Light therapy, the therapeutic pet-type robotic seal(PRAO), and slow-stroke back massage(SSBM) are non-pharmacological interventions for sleep disturbances in PlwD.PARO increased night-time sleep duration (p < 0.05). The benefit of SSBM for sleep disturbances in PlwD is unclear (p > 0.05). Although there is a lack of evidence for the effect of light therapy on sleep disturbances in PlwD (p > 0.05), light therapy reduced sleep disturbance (SMD = -0.38; 95% CI:1.25, 0.48), increased sleep efficiency (MD = 3.77; 95% CI:-0.23, 7.78), and also reduced depression (MD = -2.49; 95% CI: -2.92, -2.06). More large-scale randomized controlled trials are needed and consider combining multiple non-pharmacological measures for sleep interventions in PlwD.

Hein, M., et al. (2016). "[Support for insomnia : Recommendations for practice in general medicine]." Rev Med Brux 37(4): 235-241.
	In Belgium, poor sleep complaints are numerous and frequent in the general population. Of these complaints, one of the most important is insomnia. Acute onset and chronicity of insomnia can be explained by different models based on genetic criteria, neurophysiological, neuroendocrine, neuroimmunological and neuroimaging. Insomnia can be associated with a lot of somatic and psychiatric comorbidities. The diagnosis of insomnia is primarily a clinical diagnosis based on medical history and physical examination. Different tools can help us in our approach, such as self-questionnaires and sleep diaries while additional tests (polysomnography and actigraphy) should be reserved for research of associated sleep disorders and for unclear situations. The management of insomnia can be non-drug treatment (exercise, light therapy, acupuncture and self-treatment cognitive behavioral therapy) but also drug treatment (benzodiazepine, Z-DRUGS, melatonin, antidepressants, herbal medicines, neuroleptics and antihistaminics). Each of these approaches has advantages and disadvantages that must be considered when choosing treatment. The aim of this review is to allow general practitioners to better understand the mechanisms of insomnia and to have recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of insomnia.

Henderson, T. A. and L. D. Morries (2015). "Near-infrared photonic energy penetration: can infrared phototherapy effectively reach the human brain?" Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 11: 2191-2208.
	Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a growing health concern effecting civilians and military personnel. Research has yielded a better understanding of the pathophysiology of TBI, but effective treatments have not been forthcoming. Near-infrared light (NIR) has shown promise in animal models of both TBI and stroke. Yet, it remains unclear if sufficient photonic energy can be delivered to the human brain to yield a beneficial effect. This paper reviews the pathophysiology of TBI and elaborates the physiological effects of NIR in the context of this pathophysiology. Pertinent aspects of the physical properties of NIR, particularly in regards to its interactions with tissue, provide the background for understanding this critical issue of light penetration through tissue. Our recent tissue studies demonstrate no penetration of low level NIR energy through 2 mm of skin or 3 cm of skull and brain. However, at 10-15 W, 0.45%-2.90% of 810 nm light penetrated 3 cm of tissue. A 15 W 810 nm device (continuous or non-pulsed) NIR delivered 2.9% of the surface power density. Pulsing at 10 Hz reduced the dose of light delivered to the surface by 50%, but 2.4% of the surface energy reached the depth of 3 cm. Approximately 1.22% of the energy of 980 nm light at 10-15 W penetrated to 3 cm. These data are reviewed in the context of the literature on low-power NIR penetration, wherein less than half of 1% of the surface energy could reach a depth of 1 cm. NIR in the power range of 10-15 W at 810 and 980 nm can provide fluence within the range shown to be biologically beneficial at 3 cm depth. A companion paper reviews the clinical data on the treatment of patients with chronic TBI in the context of the current literature.

Henderson, T. A. and L. D. Morries (2015). "SPECT Perfusion Imaging Demonstrates Improvement of Traumatic Brain Injury With Transcranial Near-infrared Laser Phototherapy." Adv Mind Body Med 29(4): 27-33.
	Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a growing health concern affecting civilians and military personnel. Near-infrared (NIR) light has shown benefits in animal models and human trials for stroke and in animal models for TBI. Diodes emitting low-level NIR often have lacked therapeutic efficacy, perhaps failing to deliver sufficient radiant energy to the necessary depth. In this case report, a patient with moderate TBI documented in anatomical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) received 20 NIR treatments in the course of 2 mo using a high-power NIR laser. Symptoms were monitored by clinical examination and a novel patient diary system specifically designed for this patient population. Clinical application of these levels of infrared energy for this patient with TBI yielded highly favorable outcomes with decreased depression, anxiety, headache, and insomnia, whereas cognition and quality of life improved. Neurological function appeared to improve based on changes in the SPECT by quantitative analysis. NIR in the power range of 10-15 W at 810 and 980 nm can safely and effectively treat chronic symptoms of TBI.

Hjetland, G. J., et al. (2021). "Ambient bright light treatment improved proxy-rated sleep but not sleep measured by actigraphy in nursing home patients with dementia: a placebo-controlled randomised trial." BMC Geriatr 21(1): 312.
	BACKGROUND: Up to 70% of nursing home patients with dementia suffer from sleep problems. Light is the main zeitgeber to the circadian system and thus has a fundamental impact on sleep-wake behaviour. Low indoor light levels in nursing homes have been reported, and in combination with age-related reductions in light sensitivity, insufficient light exposure is likely to contribute to sleep problems in this population. Increasing daytime light exposure using bright light treatment (BLT) may represent a feasible non-pharmacological treatment for sleep problems in nursing home patients with dementia. METHODS: The present study reports on sleep outcomes, which are the primary outcomes of the DEM.LIGHT trial (Therapy Light Rooms for Nursing Home Patients with Dementia- Designing Diurnal Conditions for Improved Sleep, Mood and Behavioural Problems), a 24-week cluster-randomised placebo-controlled trial including 8 nursing home units and 69 resident patients. The intervention comprised ambient light of 1000 lx and 6000 K from 10:00 to 15:00, with gradually increasing and decreasing light levels prior to and following this interval, using ceiling mounted light-fixtures and light emitting diode technology. The placebo condition had continuous standard light levels (150-300 lx, ~ 3000 K). Sleep was assessed at baseline and follow-up at week 8, 16, and 24, using the proxy-rated Sleep Disorder Inventory (SDI) and actigraphy (Actiwatch II, Philips Respironics). Mixed linear models were used to evaluate intervention effects, adjusting for relevant covariates such as age, gender, number of drugs, severity of dementia, eye disease, and estimated light exposure. RESULTS: Sleep as measured by the SDI was significantly improved in the intervention group compared to the control group from baseline to week 16 (B = - 0.06, 95% CI -0.11 - -0.01, p < .05) and from baseline to week 24 (B = - 0.05, 95% CI -0.10 - -0.01, p < .05). There was no effect according to the SDI at week 8 and no significant effects in terms of actigraphically measured sleep. CONCLUSIONS: Proxy-rated sleep improved among nursing home patients with dementia following 16 and 24 weeks of BLT. These improvements were not corroborated by actigraphy recordings. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03357328 . Registered 29 November 2017 - Retrospectively registered.

Hopkins, S., et al. (2017). "Blue-Enriched Lighting for Older People Living in Care Homes: Effect on Activity, Actigraphic Sleep, Mood and Alertness." Curr Alzheimer Res 14(10): 1053-1062.
	OBJECTIVE: Environmental (little outdoor light; low indoor lighting) and age-related physiological factors (reduced light transmission through the ocular lens, reduced mobility) contribute to a light-deprived environment for older people living in care homes. METHODS: This study investigates the effect of increasing indoor light levels with blue-enriched white lighting on objective (rest-activity rhythms, performance) and self-reported (mood, sleep, alertness) measures in older people. Eighty residents (69 female), aged 86 ± 8 yrs (mean ± SD), participated (MMSE 19 ± 6). Overhead fluorescent lighting was installed in communal rooms (n=20) of seven care homes. Four weeks of blue-enriched white lighting (17000 K ≅ 900 lux) were compared with four weeks of control white lighting (4000 K ≅ 200 lux), separated by three weeks wash-out. Participants completed validated mood and sleep questionnaires, psychomotor vigilance task (PVT) and wore activity and light monitors (AWL). Rest-activity rhythms were assessed by cosinor, non-parametric circadian rhythm (NPCRA) and actigraphic sleep analysis. Blue-enriched (17000 K) light increased wake time and activity during sleep decreasing actual sleep time, sleep percentage and sleep efficiency (p < 0.05) (actigraphic sleep). Compared to 4000 K lighting, blue-enriched 17000 K lighting significantly (p < 0.05) advanced the timing of participants' rest-activity rhythm (cosinor), increased daytime and night-time activity (NPCRA), reduced subjective anxiety (HADA) and sleep quality (PSQI). There was no difference between the two light conditions in daytime alertness and performance (PVT). CONCLUSION: Blue-enriched lighting produced some positive (increased daytime activity, reduced anxiety) and negative (increased night-time activity, reduced sleep efficiency and quality) effects in older people.

Hrehová, L. and K. Mezian (2021). "Non-pharmacologic treatment of insomnia in primary care settings." Int J Clin Pract 75(6): e14084.
	INTRODUCTION: Prevalence of insomnia is higher in females and increases with higher age. Besides primary insomnia, comorbid sleep disorders are also common, accompanying different conditions. Considering the possible adverse effects of commonly used drugs to promote sleep, a non-pharmacologic approach should be preferred in most cases. Although generally considered first-line treatment, the non-pharmacologic approach is often underestimated by both patients and physicians. OBJECTIVE: To provide primary care physicians an up-to-date approach to the non-pharmacologic treatment of insomnia. METHODS: PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus databases were searched for relevant articles about the non-pharmacologic treatment of insomnia up to December 2020. We restricted our search only to articles written in English. MAIN MESSAGE: Most patients presenting with sleep disorder symptoms can be effectively managed in the primary care setting. Primary care physicians may use pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic approaches, while the latter should be generally considered first-line treatment. A primary care physician may opt to refer the patient to a subspecialist for refractory cases. CONCLUSIONS: This paper provides an overview of current recommendations and up-to-date evidence for the non-pharmacologic treatment of insomnia. This article emphasizes the importance of cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia, likewise, exercise and relaxation techniques. Complementary and alternative approaches are also covered, eg, light therapy, aromatherapy, music therapy, and herbal medicine.

Hu, L. and E. J. Wang (2023). "Sleep as a Therapeutic Target for Pain Management." Curr Pain Headache Rep 27(6): 131-141.
	PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The purpose of this review is to provide a summary of the utilization of sleep as a therapeutic target for chronic pain and to evaluate the recent literature on current and proposed pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic sleep interventions used in the management of pain disorders. RECENT FINDINGS: Sleep is a promising therapeutic target in the treatment of pain disorders with both non-pharmacologic and pharmacologic therapies. Non-pharmacologic therapies include cognitive behavioral therapy and sensory-based therapies such as pink noise, audio-visual stimulation, and morning bright light therapy. Pharmacologic therapies include melatonin, z-drugs, gabapentinoids, and the novel orexin antagonists. However, more research is needed to clarify if these therapies can improve pain specifically by improving sleep. There is a vast array of investigational opportunities in sleep-targeted therapies for pathologic pain, and larger controlled, prospective trials are needed to fully elucidate their efficacy.

Hurd, D., et al. (2019). "Prospective, Open Trial of Adjunctive Triple Chronotherapy for the Acute Treatment of Depression in Adolescent Inpatients." J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol 29(1): 20-27.
	OBJECTIVE: The aim of this pilot study was to explore the feasibility and proof of concept of triple chronotherapy (TCT) as a nonpharmacological adjunctive treatment in the acute management of depression in the adolescent population. METHODS: Thirty-one adolescents with nonpsychotic moderate-to-severe depression were included in the study. The 4-day TCT intervention comprised one night of sleep deprivation followed by 3 days of sleep phase advancement and daily bright light therapy. Primary outcomes were feasibility and depression, as measured by the Hamilton Depression Scale-17 (HAMD-17). Secondary outcomes included severity of illness, anxiety, self-harm, insomnia, and suicidality. RESULTS: Twenty-nine (94%) adolescents completed the 4-day TCT intervention. Twenty-six (84%) of the 31 enrolled patients experienced a reduction in depressive symptoms of at least 50% from baseline; 24 (77%) achieved remission, defined as a HAMD-17 score less than 8. The mean depression score was severe before the start of the intervention ( \documentclass{aastex}\usepackage{amsbsy}\usepackage{amsfonts}\usepackage{amssymb}\usepackage{bm}\usepackage{mathrsfs}\usepackage{pifont}\usepackage{stmaryrd}\usepackage{textcomp}\usepackage{portland, xspace}\usepackage{amsmath, amsxtra}\usepackage{upgreek}\pagestyle{empty}\DeclareMathSizes{10}{9}{7}{6}\begin{document} $$\overline X$$ \end{document}  = 21.8 ± 3.8) and dropped below the remission threshold by day 4 ( \documentclass{aastex}\usepackage{amsbsy}\usepackage{amsfonts}\usepackage{amssymb}\usepackage{bm}\usepackage{mathrsfs}\usepackage{pifont}\usepackage{stmaryrd}\usepackage{textcomp}\usepackage{portland, xspace}\usepackage{amsmath, amsxtra}\usepackage{upgreek}\pagestyle{empty}\DeclareMathSizes{10}{9}{7}{6}\begin{document} $$\overline X$$ \end{document}  = 4.4 ± 5.1; p < 0.001); the mean depression score was mild at 1 week (n = 17; \documentclass{aastex}\usepackage{amsbsy}\usepackage{amsfonts}\usepackage{amssymb}\usepackage{bm}\usepackage{mathrsfs}\usepackage{pifont}\usepackage{stmaryrd}\usepackage{textcomp}\usepackage{portland, xspace}\usepackage{amsmath, amsxtra}\usepackage{upgreek}\pagestyle{empty}\DeclareMathSizes{10}{9}{7}{6}\begin{document} $$\overline X$$ \end{document}  = 9.3 ± 5.2; p < 0.001) and 1 month (n = 10, \documentclass{aastex}\usepackage{amsbsy}\usepackage{amsfonts}\usepackage{amssymb}\usepackage{bm}\usepackage{mathrsfs}\usepackage{pifont}\usepackage{stmaryrd}\usepackage{textcomp}\usepackage{portland, xspace}\usepackage{amsmath, amsxtra}\usepackage{upgreek}\pagestyle{empty}\DeclareMathSizes{10}{9}{7}{6}\begin{document} $$\overline X$$ \end{document}  = 7.8 ± 5.2; p < 0.001). Severity of illness scores according to the Clinical Global Impressions severity subscale improved from a mean of 5.3 at baseline to 3.1 following the TCT intervention (p < 0.0001); the effect was sustained through the 1-week postdischarge and the 1-month follow-up. Secondary outcomes showed significant improvement following the 4-day TCT intervention; improvement was sustained through the 1-week and 1-month follow-up periods. CONCLUSIONS: This pilot study determined TCT to be a feasible, safe, rapid, and potentially effective adjunctive treatment for depression in the adolescent population.

Ioannou, M., et al. (2021). "Total Sleep Deprivation Followed by Bright Light Therapy as Rapid Relief for Depression: A Pragmatic Randomized Controlled Trial." Front Psychiatry 12: 705090.
	Background: Total sleep deprivation (TSD) combined with bright light therapy (BLT) has been suggested as a valuable add-on to standard treatment for rapid relief of depression. However, there is a lack of randomized controlled trials in real-life clinical settings. The aim of this pragmatic randomized clinical trial was to investigate the effectiveness, acceptance, and feasibility of TSD combined with BLT as add-on to standard treatment for depression in a real-life clinical setting. Methods: Thirty-three inpatients were randomly assigned to either: a) an intervention group receiving a single-night TSD followed by 6 days BLT (10.000 lux, 30 min/day) as add-on to standard treatment; or b) a control group receiving a short sleep-hygiene consultation in addition to standard treatment. The follow-up period was 1 week. Results: No statistical differences were found in response rates, reduction of depressive and insomnia symptoms, length of stay, readmission rate, and clinical improvement. Both groups reported positive experiences toward the received treatment with low drop-out rates. Conclusions: One-night TSD followed by BLT was not effective as a rapid relief for depression at 1-week follow-up; however, the treatment was feasible and well-tolerated.

Iranzo, A. (2016). "Sleep in Neurodegenerative Diseases." Sleep Med Clin 11(1): 1-18.
	Disorders of sleep are an integral part of neurodegenerative diseases and include insomnia, sleep-wake cycle disruption, excessive daytime sleepiness that may be manifested as persistent somnolence or sudden onset of sleep episodes, obstructive and central sleep apnea, rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, and restless legs syndrome. The origin of these sleep disorders is multifactorial including degeneration of the brain areas that modulate sleep, the symptoms of the disease, and the effect of medications. Treatment of sleep disorders in patients with neurodegenerative diseases should be individualized and includes behavioral therapy, sleep hygiene, bright light therapy, melatonin, hypnotics, waking-promoting agents, and continuous positive airway pressure.

Jaqua, E. E., et al. (2023). "Common Sleep Disorders Affecting Older Adults." Perm J 27(1): 122-132.
	Sleep disorders in older adults increase with aging, likely due to increased sleep latency, decreased sleep efficiency, and total sleep time. Common sleep issues include chronic insomnia, circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, sleep-related movement disorders, and sleep-disordered breathing. Diagnostic tools, such as a comprehensive sleep history and questionnaires, or a sleep log for more specific complaints, are commonly used. Polysomnography is not recommended as a routine test; however, it can be used for abnormal behaviors during sleep or if treatment fails. Sleep disorder management is based on the etiology and may include nonpharmacological and pharmacological alternative treatments. For example, nonpharmacological management for chronic insomnia and some sleep disorders may consist of cognitive behavioral therapy, sleep hygiene education, relaxation therapy, sleep restriction, light therapy, and stimulus control therapy. Because the quality of evidence for pharmacological treatment is poor, the medication choice should be based on shared decision-making between the practitioner and the patient, with limited prescription.

Johnson, J. A., et al. (2016). "The LITE study: Rationale and protocol for a randomized controlled trial of light therapy for cancer-related fatigue in cancer survivors." Contemp Clin Trials 49: 166-173.
	Fatigue is a common and distressing symptom that can last for months or years in up to one-third of cancer survivors. Despite its prevalence, the nature and mechanisms of cancer-related fatigue are poorly understood and the available treatments may not provide sufficient relief. Fatigue has been identified as a significant contributor to decreased quality of life, making it an important target for intervention. One approach that may be a safe and inexpensive treatment is bright light therapy. METHODS: This study is a 4-week blinded randomized controlled trial. Subjects will be men and women who meet criteria for cancer-related fatigue and have completed cancer treatment. Subjects will be randomly assigned to receive a Litebook treatment device that produces either bright white light (treatment) or dim red light (active control). The devices will be used daily for 30min upon waking for a period of four weeks. The primary outcome, fatigue, will be measured with the Multidimensional Fatigue Symptom Inventory-SF. Secondary outcomes include mood disturbance, sleep quality, quality of life, diurnal cortisol, and inflammatory biomarkers. Fatigue assessments will be completed weekly and secondary outcomes will be assessed at pre- and post-intervention. CONCLUSIONS: The current research will examine the effect of light exposure on cancer-related fatigue and its potential psychological, behavioral, and biological mechanisms. If successful, this research would support the use of light therapy for the management of persistent fatigue in cancer survivors, expanding existing treatment options. It may also improve upon the current understanding of the mechanisms that underlie cancer-related fatigue.

Joshi, S. (2008). "Nonpharmacologic therapy for insomnia in the elderly." Clin Geriatr Med 24(1): 107-119, viii.
	Nonpharmacologic modalities may be used alone or in combination with pharmacologic therapy for effective treatment of insomnia in the elderly. Nondrug treatments involve behavioral, cognitive, and physiologic interventions. Common methods of cognitive behavior therapy for insomnia include: relaxation, stimulus control, sleep restriction, cognitive interventions or therapy, sleep education and sleep hygiene, light therapy, and chronotherapy. Evidence suggests that nonpharmacologic treatments are effective and well suited for the clinical management of insomnia in the elderly.

Jurvelin, H., et al. (2014). "Transcranial bright light treatment via the ear canals in seasonal affective disorder: a randomized, double-blind dose-response study." BMC Psychiatry 14: 288.
	BACKGROUND: Bright light treatment is effective for seasonal affective disorder (SAD), although the mechanisms of action are still unknown. We investigated whether transcranial bright light via the ear canals has an antidepressant effect in the treatment of SAD. METHODS: During the four-week study period, 89 patients (67 females; 22 males, aged 22-65, mean ± SD age: 43.2 ± 10.9 years) suffering from SAD were randomized to receive a 12-min daily dose of photic energy of one of three intensities (1 lumen/0.72 mW/cm(2); 4 lumens/2.881 mW/cm(2); 9 lumens/6.482 mW/cm(2)) via the ear canals. The light was produced using light-emitting diodes. The severity of depressive symptoms was assessed with the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale - Seasonal Affective Disorder (SIGH-SAD), the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAMA), and the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). Cognitive performance was measured by the Trail Making Test (TMT). The within-group and between-group changes in these variables throughout the study were analysed with a repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), whereas gender differences at baseline within the light groups were analysed using Student's t-tests. RESULTS: Patients in all three groups showed significant decreases in their BDI, HAMA, and SIGH-SAD scores. Response rates, i.e., an at least 50% decrease of symptoms as measured by the BDI, were 74%-79% in the three treatment groups. Corresponding variations for the SIGH-SAD and the HAMA were 35-45% and 47-62%, respectively. No intensity-based dose-response relationships in the improvement of anxiety and depressive symptoms or cognitive performance between treatment groups were observed. Approximately one in four patients experienced mild adverse effects, of which the most common were headache, insomnia, and nausea. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggests that transcranial bright light treatment may have antidepressant and anxiolytic effect in SAD patients, as both self- and psychiatrist-rated depressive and anxiety symptoms decreased in all treatment groups. These improvements are comparable to findings of earlier bright light studies that used conventional devices. The lack of dose response may be due to a saturation effect above a certain light intensity threshold. Further studies on the effects of transcranial bright light with an adequate placebo condition are needed. TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT01293409, ClinicalTrials.gov.

Kallestad, H., et al. (2007). "[Sleep deprivation as antidepressive treatment]." Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen 127(10): 1360-1363.
	BACKGROUND: Sleep deprivation, i.e. keeping patients awake for approximately 35 hours, is an antidepressive treatment that is rarely used in Norway. MATERIAL AND METHODS: Review of a selection of publications from Medline, ISI, and psychINFO. The treatment is illustrated with two clinical vignettes. RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION: Sleep deprivation is a well documented treatment of depression. The effect is transient but can be prolonged by sleep phase advancement, concurrent pharmacological treatment, and light therapy. The effect is comparable to other standard treatments for depression, but is reported to occur within hours rather than weeks. There are few studies with follow-up results for more than two weeks and there is uncertainty regarding the mechanisms of change that are involved in sleep deprivation. Our two pilot patients experienced over 50% symptom reduction in three days. Results from these patients indicate that it may be of interest to study the course of response to sleep deprivation and three day sleep phase advancement for several weeks, and whether the treatment has the additional effect of improving sleep quality and stabilizing diurnal rhythm.

Kamei, Y. (2009). "[Bright light therapy]." Nihon Rinsho 67(8): 1611-1615.
	Bright light is a treatment of choice for seasonal affective disorder. Other indications for bright light therapy have also been tested. These include circadian rhythm sleep disorders, early-morning awakening or sleep-maintenance insomnia in elders and behavioral disturbance or insomnia in organic dementia. In these sleep disorders, the pattern of sleep-wake is misaligned with the patient's circadian system or the external environment, resulting in insomnia. Appropriately-timed exposure to bright light can shift the sleep-wake cycle to earlier or later times, in order to correct for misalignment between the circadian system and the desired sleep-wake schedule. Evidence of the efficacy of bright light was so limited. Further research is needed to determine guidelines for the appropriate timing and safe use of bright light therapy.

Kang, J., et al. (2022). "Effects of nonpharmacological interventions on sleep improvement and delirium prevention in critically ill patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis." Aust Crit Care.
	OBJECTIVE: Sleep disturbance and delirium are common problems experienced by critically ill patients in the intensive care unit (ICU). These interrelated issues increase the length of stay in the ICU but might also negatively affect long-term health outcomes. The objective of this study was to identify the nonpharmacological interventions provided to improve sleep or prevent delirium in ICU patients or both and integrate their effect sizes. REVIEW METHODS: This study was a registered systematic review and meta-analysis. We searched MEDLINE, CINAHL, EMBASE, Web of Science, and Cochrane Library from their inception until December 2021. We included randomised controlled trials and nonrandomised controlled trials-(RCT) that provided nonpharmacological interventions and reported sleep or delirium as outcome variables. Studies not published in English or whose full text was not available were excluded. The quality of the evidence was assessed with version 2 of the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for RCTs and the Risk Of Bias In Non-randomised Studies of Interventions (ROBINS-I). RESULTS: The systematic review included 118 studies, and the meta-analysis included 100 studies. Overall nonpharmacological interventions had significant effects on subjective sleep quality (standardised mean difference = 0.30, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.05 to 0.56), delirium incidence (odds ratio = 0.62, 95% CI = 0.53 to 0.73), and delirium duration (standardised mean difference = -0.68, 95% CI = -0.93 to -0.43). In individual interventions, aromatherapy, music, and massage effectively improved sleep. Exercise, family participation, information giving, cognitive stimulation, bright light therapy, architectural intervention, and bundles/protocols effectively reduced delirium. Light/noise blocking was the only intervention that ensured both sleep improvement and delirium prevention. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest nonpharmacological interventions improve sleep and prevent delirium in ICU patients. We recommend that ICU nurses use nonpharmacological interventions that promote person-environment compatibility in their clinical practice. The results of our review can guide nurses in adopting interventions related to sleep and delirium. PROSPERO REFERENCE NUMBER: CRD42021230815.

Kaplan, K. A. (2020). "Sleep and sleep treatments in bipolar disorder." Curr Opin Psychol 34: 117-122.
	Sleep and circadian disturbances in bipolar disorder are common and persistent within and between illness episodes. Insomnia, hypersomnia, reduced need for sleep, sleep schedule variability and circadian rhythm disorders are frequently observed. In this article, recent research is reviewed suggesting that the presence of sleep disturbance is associated with functional impairment, interacts with other physical and environmental systems (e.g. physical activity, light exposure), and may attenuate response to treatment. Established and emerging treatments for various sleep disturbances are reviewed, with emphasis on applications for light therapy and adapted cognitive behavioral therapy. There remains a critical need to understand the co-occurrence of various sleep disturbances, develop, and refine treatment approaches (especially for hypersomnia/long sleep duration) and adapt wearable and smartphone technologies to aid assessment and intervention.

Kaplan, K. A., et al. (2019). "Effect of Light Flashes vs Sham Therapy During Sleep With Adjunct Cognitive Behavioral Therapy on Sleep Quality Among Adolescents: A Randomized Clinical Trial." JAMA Netw Open 2(9): e1911944.
	IMPORTANCE: Owing to biological, behavioral, and societal factors, sleep duration in teenagers is often severely truncated, leading to pervasive sleep deprivation. OBJECTIVE: To determine whether a novel intervention, using both light exposure during sleep and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), would increase total sleep time in teenagers by enabling them to go to sleep earlier than usual. DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial, conducted between November 1, 2013, and May 31, 2016, among 102 adolescents enrolled full-time in grades 9 to 12, who expressed difficulty going to bed earlier and waking up early enough, was composed of 2 phases. In phase 1, participants were assigned to receive either 3 weeks of light or sham therapy and were asked to try to go to sleep earlier. In phase 2, participants received 4 brief CBT sessions in addition to a modified light or sham therapy. All analyses were performed on an intent-to-treat basis. INTERVENTIONS: Light therapy consisted of receiving a 3-millisecond light flash every 20 seconds during the final 3 hours of sleep (phase 1) or final 2 hours of sleep (phase 2). Sham therapy used an identical device, but delivered 1 minute of light pulses (appearing in 20-second intervals, for a total of 3 pulses) per hour during the final 3 hours of sleep (phase 1) or 2 hours of sleep (phase 2). Light therapy occurred every night during the 4-week intervention. Cognitive behavioral therapy consisted of four 50-minute in-person sessions once per week. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Primary outcome measures included diary-based sleep times, momentary ratings of evening sleepiness, and subjective measures of sleepiness and sleep quality. RESULTS: Among the 102 participants (54 female [52.9%]; mean [SD] age, 15.6 [1.1] years), 72 were enrolled in phase 1 and 30 were enrolled in phase 2. Mixed-effects models revealed that light therapy alone was inadequate in changing the timing of sleep. However, compared with sham therapy plus CBT alone, light therapy plus CBT significantly moved sleep onset a mean (SD) of 50.1 (27.5) minutes earlier and increased nightly total sleep time by a mean (SD) of 43.3 (35.0) minutes. Light therapy plus CBT also resulted in a 7-fold greater increase in bedtime compliance than that observed among participants receiving sham plus CBT (mean [SD], 2.21 [3.91] vs 0.29 [0.76]), as well as a mean 0.55-point increase in subjective evening sleepiness as compared with a mean 0.48-point decrease in participants receiving sham plus CBT as measured on a 7-point sleepiness scale. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study found that light exposure during sleep, in combination with a brief, motivation-focused CBT intervention, was able to consistently move bedtimes earlier and increase total sleep time in teenagers. This type of passive light intervention in teenagers may lead to novel therapeutic applications. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01406691.

Kawasaki, A., et al. (2020). "Can Extra Daytime Light Exposure Improve Well-Being and Sleep? A Pilot Study of Patients With Glaucoma." Front Neurol 11: 584479.
	Glaucoma damages retinal ganglion cells, including intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGCs). These cells modulate various non-visual physiological and psychological functions which are modulated by light. In patients with glaucoma, we assessed the effect of daily bright light exposure (LE) on several melanopsin-dependent functions, such as the pupil constriction, circadian rest-activity cycles, sleep and subjective well-being including relaxation, alertness and mood. Twenty patients participated in the study (9 women, 11 men, mean age = 67.6 ± 7.5 y). Pupillometry was performed before the LE weeks and repeated on the last day of LE. The post-illumination pupil response (PIPR) was calculated as a proxy for melanopsin-dependent activation. Participants continuously wore an activity monitor and self-assessed sleep quality, well-being and visual comfort for 7 days before and during 4 weeks of daily bright LE (30 min to 10,000 lux polychromatic bright white light). After the LE, there was a significantly greater PIPR and higher subjective sleep quality when compared to the pre-LE week (p < 0.05), but no significant changes in 24-h rhythms or sleep parameters. A greater PIPR was correlated with an increase in circadian amplitude and higher inter-daily stability (derived from rest-activity cycles; p < 0.05). In a small group of patients with glaucoma, scheduled daily bright light exposure could improve subjective sleep quality. These findings highlight the importance to evaluate and maintain non-visual functions at different levels in patients with progressive loss of ipRGCs.

Keijzer, H., et al. (2014). "Why the dim light melatonin onset (DLMO) should be measured before treatment of patients with circadian rhythm sleep disorders." Sleep Med Rev 18(4): 333-339.
	Treatment of circadian rhythm sleep disorders (CRSD) may include light therapy, chronotherapy and melatonin. Exogenous melatonin is increasingly being used in patients with insomnia or CRSD. Although pharmacopoeias and the European food safety authority (EFSA) recommend administering melatonin 1-2 h before desired bedtime, several studies have shown that melatonin is not always effective if administered according to that recommendation. Crucial for optimal treatment of CRSD, melatonin and other treatments should be administered at a time related to individual circadian timing (typically assessed using the dim light melatonin onset (DLMO)). If not administered according to the individual patient's circadian timing, melatonin and other treatments may not only be ineffective, they may even result in contrary effects. Endogenous melatonin levels can be measured reliably in saliva collected at the patient's home. A clinically reliably DLMO can be calculated using a fixed threshold. Diary and polysomnographic sleep-onset time do not reliably predict DLMO or circadian timing in patients with CRSD. Knowing the patient's individual circadian timing by assessing DLMO can improve diagnosis and treatment of CRSD with melatonin as well as other therapies such as light or chronotherapy, and optimizing treatment timing will shorten the time required to achieve results.

Kennedy, K. E. R., et al. (2023). "A randomized, sham-controlled trial of a novel near-infrared phototherapy device on sleep and daytime function." J Clin Sleep Med.
	STUDY OBJECTIVES: Near-infrared (NIR) light exhibits several therapeutic properties, but little is known about the benefits to sleep and daytime function. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effects of red and NIR exposure before bed on sleep and next-day function. METHODS: Thirty adults (30-60 y) with a self-reported sleep complaint but without a sleep disorder participated in a randomized, sham-controlled study for a duration of five weeks. After a two-week baseline period, participants wore either a cervical red light/NIR-emitting collar (combined 660nm, 740nm, 810nm, and 870nm) or sham device every other night before bed for three weeks. Sleep was measured using actigraphy and sleep diaries. Mood and performance were assessed using weekly self-reported surveys and debrief interviews. RESULTS: Objective sleep parameters, as measured by actigraphy, did not differ between the active or sham groups, but improved self-reported sleep, as well as perceived improvements in relaxation and mood, were observed among active but not sham users. Both active and sham users improved in insomnia severity index (ISI) score by the end of the trial. CONCLUSIONS: Red and NIR exposure to the head and neck before bed may offer potential therapeutic benefits to sleep and daytime function, but further work needs to be done to determine optimal dose parameters, wavelengths, and milliwatt power level. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Registry: ClinicalTrials.gov; Name: Phase II Study - Trial of a Phototherapy Light Device to Improve Sleep Health (PHOTONS); URL: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT05116358; Identifier: NCT05116358.

Khan, S. A., et al. (2011). "Therapeutic options in the management of sleep disorders in visually impaired children: a systematic review." Clin Ther 33(2): 168-181.
	BACKGROUND: Treatment of sleep disorders in visually impaired children is complicated by a complex pathophysiology, a high incidence of sleep disorders in this population, and a dearth of management options. The significant impact on the health of these children and distress to their caregivers warrant a systematic assessment of the published literature on therapeutic approaches. OBJECTIVE: This systematic review aims to assess the current therapeutic options in the management of sleep disorders in visually impaired children to identify knowledge gaps and guide future research. METHODS: A search of primary literature was conducted using the bibliographic databases PubMed (1980-August 2010), EMBASE (1990-August 2010), Science Citation Index Expanded (1990-August 2010), and CINHAL (1992-August 2010) and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL). Additional studies were identified through snowballing search techniques (manually by searching retrieved references and electronically by using citation-tracking software). Search terms included behavioral treatment, children, circadian rhythm, hypnosedatives, intellectual disability, light therapy, melatonin, phototherapy, random allocation, randomized controlled trial (RCT), sleep disorder, and visual impairment. Randomized and quasi-randomized clinical trials of therapeutic options (behavioral treatment, light therapy, melatonin, or hypnosedatives) used in participants aged 3 months to 18 years who had both a visual impairment and a sleep disorder were included. Independent extraction of articles was performed by 2 authors using predefined data fields, including quality of the therapeutic options, based on the Strength of Recommendation Taxonomy evidence-rating system. RESULTS: Two RCTs were retrieved for melatonin, with improved effect on sleep latency (P = 0.019 and P < 0.05, respectively). However, separate analysis for visual impairment was not conducted. No RCTs were retrieved for behavioral intervention, light therapy, or hypnosedatives. Three studies using behavioral therapy (2 case reports and 1 case series) anecdotally showed improvement in sleep habit. No improvement in sleep rhythm was observed with a case series applying light therapy as an intervention. CONCLUSIONS: Children with visual impairment and sleep disorders are a heterogeneous patient group, making diagnosis and treatment difficult. RCTs on treatment options remain in their infancy, with a lack of evidence for appropriate therapeutic strategies. Trials across a range of selected diagnoses need to be conducted with adequate sample populations to differentiate the efficacy of 4 different treatment modalities (behavioral therapy, light therapy, melatonin, and hypnosedatives) as agents for improving sleep.

Khudhair, O. S., et al. (2018). "Fibromyalgia Syndrome and Vitiligo: A Novel Association." Arch Rheumatol 33(2): 174-180.
	OBJECTIVES: This study aims to assess the relationship between fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) and vitiligo in Iraqi patients and evaluate the predictors of this relationship, if present. PATIENTS AND METHODS: The case-control study included 100 Iraqi patients (46 males, 54 females; mean age 30.4±14 years; range 15 to 65 years) with vitiligo and 200 age- and sex-matched healthy controls (74 males, 126 females; mean age 30.3±9.4 years; range 15 to 62 years). Baseline characteristics of patients and controls were recorded. The 2012 Canadian Guidelines criteria were used for the diagnosis of FMS and applied to all patients and controls. RESULTS: Prevalence of FMS in vitiligo patients and controls was 12% and 7%, respectively (p=0.15, odds ratio=1.8, 95% confidence interval=0.8-4.08). FMS symptoms in vitiligo patients were fatigue (46%), diffuse body pain (34%), sleep disturbance (33%), cognitive dysfunction (30%), and mood disorders (23%), while visceral involvements were central nervous system (52%), skin (35%), gastrointestinal tract (32%), cardiovascular system- respiratory system (16%), genitourinary tract (8%), and ear nose throat (7%). Of vitiligo patients, FMS was significantly more common among females (22.2%) compared to none among males (0%) (p<0.05). Prevalence of FMS was restricted to female sex only and a significantly higher prevalence rate of FMS was found among female vitiligo patients (22.2%) compared to controls (9.5%). Receiving phototherapy significantly increased the risk of having FMS by 5 times compared to female patients not receiving phototherapy. Use of any steroid reduced the risk of having FMS by 2.5 times (inverse of odds ratio=0.4) among females patients (p>0/05). No significant association was found between FMS in vitiligo patients and age, disease duration, type of vitiligo, use of any immunosuppressant and body mass index (p>0.05). CONCLUSION: Fibromyalgia syndrome was more prevalent in vitiligo patients compared to controls, which was clinically important but statistically not significant. There was a significant association between FMS in vitiligo patients and female sex, severe form of vitiligo, and receiving phototherapy. This may suggest that early diagnosis of FMS in vitiligo patients may help in early treatment and subsequently improve patients' quality of life.

Killgore, W. D. S., et al. (2022). "Treatment with morning blue light increases left amygdala volume and sleep duration among individuals with posttraumatic stress disorder." Front Behav Neurosci 16: 910239.
	BACKGROUND: Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is associated with numerous cognitive, affective, and psychophysiological outcomes, including problems with sleep and circadian rhythms. We tested the effectiveness of a daily morning blue-light exposure treatment (BLT) versus a matched amber light treatment (ALT) to regulate sleep in individuals diagnosed with PTSD. Moreover, PTSD is also associated with reliable findings on structural neuroimaging scans, including reduced amygdala volumes and other differences in cortical gray matter volume (GMV) that may be indicative of underlying neurobehavioral dysfunctions. We examined the effect of BLT versus ALT on GMV and its association with sleep outcomes. METHODS: Seventy-six individuals (25 male; 51 female) meeting DSM-V criteria for PTSD (Age = 31.45 years, SD = 8.83) completed sleep assessments and structural neuroimaging scans, followed by random assignment one of two light groups, including BLT (469 nm; n = 39) or placebo ALT (578 nm; n = 37) light therapy daily for 30-min over 6-weeks. Participants wore a wrist actigraph for the duration of the study. After treatment, participants returned to complete sleep assessments and a structural neuroimaging scan. Neuroimaging data were analyzed using the Computational Anatomy Toolbox (CAT12) and Voxel-Based Morphometry (VBM) modules within the Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM12) software. RESULTS: The BLT condition produced significant increases in total time in bed and total sleep time from actigraphy compared to the ALT condition, while ALT improved wake after sleep onset and sleep efficiency compared to BLT. Additionally, BLT led to an increase in left amygdala volume compared to ALT but did not affect hypothesized medial prefrontal regions. Finally, within group correlations showed that improvements in sleep quality and nightmare severity were correlated with increases in left amygdala volume over the course of treatment for the BLT group but not the ALT group. CONCLUSION: In individuals with PTSD, daily exposure to morning blue light treatment was associated with improvements in objective sleep duration and increased volume of the left amygdala compared to amber placebo light treatment, and changes in amygdala volume correlated with subjective improvement in sleep. These findings suggest that daily morning BLT may provide an important non-pharmacologic adjunctive approach for facilitating sleep and neurobehavioral recovery from PTSD.

Kim, H., et al. (2020). "Effect of Forest Therapy for Menopausal Women with Insomnia." Int J Environ Res Public Health 17(18).
	Female hormone changes during menopause can affect the autonomic nervous system, circadian rhythm, and secretion of cortisol/melatonin, resulting in a vulnerability to insomnia. In this light, therapy has been gaining attention as a way to reduce stress hormones by stabilizing the autonomic nervous system. Thus, this study aims to objectively and scientifically analyze the impact of forest therapy in postmenopausal insomnia patients. The forest therapy program lasted 6 days, wherein 35 postmenopausal women performed activities such as trekking, leg massages, stretches, and bathing in warm and cold water. They also underwent serologic tests, participated in polysomnography (PSG), and answered sleep questionnaires before and after the program. Further, a statistical analysis compared the results. Serologic tests showed a significant reduction of cortisol from 10.2 ± 3.79 to 7.75 ± 2.81, while PSGs showed how sleep efficiency increased to 89.3 ± 4.3% (p < 0.01), and how waking after sleep onset reduced to 47.4 ± 22.3 min (p < 0.01). The total sleep time also increased to 428.5 min and sleep latency was 11.1 ± 11.0 min. Despite its limitations, forest therapy could be a good alternative to nonpharmacological treatment for mitigating insomnia in postmenopausal women.

Kim, S. J., et al. (2021). "Positive effect of timed blue-enriched white light on sleep and cognition in patients with mild and moderate Alzheimer's disease." Sci Rep 11(1): 10174.
	Conflicting results have been reported regarding the effectiveness of light treatment (LT) in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). We investigated the effectiveness of blue-enriched white LT on sleep, cognition, mood and behavior in patients with mild and moderate AD. The treatment group (n = 14) sat about 60 cm away from a small (136 × 73 × 16 mm) LED light box for 1 h each morning for 2 weeks. The control group (n = 11) wore dark, blue-attenuating sunglasses during the 1 h exposures. The morning light started 9-10 h after each individual's dim light melatonin onset (DLMO). Assessments were done at baseline (T0), immediate post-treatment (T1), and 4 weeks after the end of the 2 weeks of LT (T2). Sleep was measured by actigraphy. Blue-enriched LT had a significantly better effect on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index at T2 compared to blue-attenuated LT, and a trend of better effectiveness on total sleep time at T2. There was a significant increase in Mini-Mental State Examination score at T2 after blue-enriched LT than that at T0. Our findings suggest that morning blue-enriched LT has a benefit in improving sleep and cognitive function in AD patients.

Kim, W. H., et al. (2022). "The Effect of Bright Light Therapy on Sleep and Quality of Life in Patients With Poststroke Insomnia." Psychosom Med 84(1): 123-130.
	OBJECTIVE: Poststroke insomnia is common and negatively affects stroke recovery. The objective of this study was to determine the effectiveness of bright light therapy for mild-to-moderate stroke patients with insomnia. METHODS: This study was randomized, double blind, and placebo controlled. A 2-week trial was conducted on patients with mild-to-moderate stroke who had poststroke insomnia. Only patients who had experienced a first episode of stroke were enrolled in this study. Sleep parameters were measured using the Actiwatch Spectrum Pro for 7 days before and after light therapy. The instrument specifically collected data concerning sleep, mood state, fatigue, and subjective quality of life. Participants with poststroke insomnia received bright light therapy (10,000 lux) or placebo therapy for 30 minutes in the early morning. A total of 112 eligible participants entered the study, but only 56 patients were randomized to treatment (27 to bright light therapy and 29 to placebo therapy). RESULTS: Results from analysis of variance showed that the mean change of sleep latency (F(1,55) =4.793, p = .033) and sleep efficiency (F(1,55) = 5.625, p = .022) were significantly superior in bright light therapy over placebo. Bright light therapy resulted in significant improvements in daytime sleepiness, fatigue, mood, and quality of life in study participants (p < .05). CONCLUSIONS: Bright light therapy is a nonpharmacological treatment of early, poststroke insomnia in patients who had a mild to moderate stroke. In addition, bright light therapy is effective for the treatment of daytime sleepiness, fatigue, and depression and for improving quality of life in patients with poststroke insomnia. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT04721574.

Kimura, S., et al. (2021). "Core body temperature changes in school-age children with circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder." Sleep Med 87: 97-104.
	OBJECTIVE/BACKGROUND: Core body temperature (CBT) is considered a valuable marker for circadian rhythm. This study aimed to investigate the changes in CBT that are associated with the symptoms of circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder (CRSWD) post-treatment in children. PATIENTS/METHODS: Twenty-eight school-age children [10 boys and 18 girls; mean age (±standard deviation), 13.68 ± 0.93 years] who were admitted to our hospital with CRSWD underwent treatment for 6-8 weeks according to the following protocol: lights-out for sleep at 21:00; phototherapy for waking at 6:00 or 7:00; light exercise everyday (eg, a 20- to 30-min walk). CBT was continuously measured for 24 h on the first day of admission and on the first day after treatment. RESULTS: The mean time of sleep onset/offset (±standard deviation; in hours:minutes) 1 week before admission and 1 week after treatment were 23:53 ± 2:26/9:58 ± 2:15 and 21:17 ± 0:19/6:46 ± 0:32, respectively. The mean times of sleep onset and offset measured post-treatment were significantly earlier than those measured pre-treatment (p < 0.001). The mean CBT and mean minimum CBT during sleep were significantly lower on the first day post-treatment than on the first day of admission (p = 0.011 and p < 0.001, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Symptom improvements in patients with CRSWD were associated with a decrease in CBT during sleep, suggesting that CBT may be a biomarker for improvements in CRSWD. These results help elucidate the cause of this sleep disorder.

Kinoshita, T., et al. (2020). "The effects of bright light treatment via ear canals on quality of sleep and depressive mood among overworked employees: A randomized-controlled clinical trial." Work 67(2): 323-329.
	BACKGROUND: Many overworked employees need tools to improve their depressive mood or sleep disorder. In Finland, a new device of bright light therapy was developed. OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to evaluate the effect of bright light treatment via ear canals on improving the depressive mood and sleep disorder. METHODS: We conducted a randomized, controlled, crossover designed, open-label trial. We examined 27 participants aged 23-52 years, assigned to either Early treatment or Later treatment groups. The Early treatment group used the device on weekdays for the first 4 weeks, followed by a 4-week observation period. The Later treatment group had an observation period for the first 4 weeks, followed by device treatment for the subsequent 4 weeks. Every Friday, the participants were asked to answer questionnaires: A Self-rating Depression Scale (SDS), an Athens Insomnia Scale (AIS), and a Profile of Mood States (POMS) Brief Form. RESULTS: While no significant effect was found on the SDS following treatment (p = 0.16), the AIS showed a significant improvement (p = 0.004), and the scores for the Depression (D) and Vigor (V) of POMs decreased significantly (p = 0.045, p = 0.006, respectively). CONCLUSIONS: Bright light treatment via ear canals may improve sleep quality and depressive mood.

Kirisoglu, C. and C. Guilleminault (2004). "Twenty minutes versus forty-five minutes morning bright light treatment on sleep onset insomnia in elderly subjects." J Psychosom Res 56(5): 537-542.
	OBJECTIVE: To compare the efficacy of 20 min versus 45 min light exposure for relieving psychophysiological insomnia in the elderly. METHODS: Prospective recruitment of subjects 60 years and older with psychophysiological insomnia. Random distribution to 20 or 45 min of daily exposure to 10,000 lux for 60 days. Sleep latency, total sleep time, fatigue and activity were measured at baseline and 3 and 6 months posttreatment. Blind analysis of data and comparison were performed using repeated-measure analysis of variance, independent samples t test and Wilcoxon rank signed test. RESULTS: At 3 months, improvement was significantly higher in the 45-min versus 20-min condition. At 6 months, variables returned toward baseline in the 20-min but not in the 45-min condition. CONCLUSIONS: Twenty minutes of bright light treatment leads to a lesser treatment response than 45 min at 3-month follow-up and to a return toward baseline at 6-month follow-up that was not seen with a 45-min exposure.

Ko, M. J., et al. (2011). "Narrowband ultraviolet B phototherapy for patients with refractory uraemic pruritus: a randomized controlled trial." Br J Dermatol 165(3): 633-639.
	BACKGROUND: Pruritus is very common in uraemic patients, but the treatment remains challenging. Studies regarding narrowband ultraviolet B (NB-UVB) phototherapy for uraemic pruritus are rare. OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether or not NB-UVB phototherapy is an effective treatment for uraemic pruritus. METHODS: We conducted a single-blind, randomized, controlled trial for patients with refractory uraemic pruritus. The treatment group received NB-UVB phototherapy three times per week for 6 weeks. The dose of NB-UVB started from 210 mJ cm(-2) and was increased by 10% each time. The control group received time-matched exposures to long-wave UVA radiation. A visual analogue scale (VAS) score was evaluated weekly for pruritus intensity for 12 weeks. The characteristics of pruritus were also assessed by a questionnaire at baseline and after 6 weeks of phototherapy. RESULTS: Both the NB-UVB and control groups had significant and comparable improvement in the pruritus intensity VAS scores during the period of phototherapy and follow-up. Compared with the control group, the NB-UVB group showed a significant improvement in the involved body surface area affected by pruritus (P = 0·006), but not in sleep quality. More detailed regression and estimating analysis revealed that the patients in the NB-UVB group had lower pruritus intensity scores at week 6, week 10 and week 12. This may indicate a beneficial difference at certain time points, but the effect seems marginal. CONCLUSIONS: NB-UVB phototherapy does not show a significant effect in reducing pruritus intensity compared with a control group for refractory uraemic pruritus. Further studies are warranted.

Kohyama, J. (2009). "A newly proposed disease condition produced by light exposure during night: asynchronization." Brain Dev 31(4): 255-273.
	The bedtime of preschoolers/pupils/students in Japan has become progressively later with the result sleep duration has become progressively shorter. With these changes, more than half of the preschoolers/pupils/students in Japan recently have complained of daytime sleepiness, while approximately one quarter of junior and senior high school students in Japan reportedly suffer from insomnia. These preschoolers/pupils/students may be suffering from behaviorally induced insufficient sleep syndrome due to inadequate sleep hygiene. If this diagnosis is correct, they should be free from these complaints after obtaining sufficient sleep by avoiding inadequate sleep hygiene. However, such a therapeutic approach often fails. Although social factors are often involved in these sleep disturbances, a novel clinical notion--asynchronization--can further a deeper understanding of the pathophysiology of these disturbances. The essence of asynchronization is a disturbance in various aspects (e.g., cycle, amplitude, phase and interrelationship) of the biological rhythms that normally exhibit circadian oscillation, presumably involving decreased activity of the serotonergic system. The major trigger of asynchronization is hypothesized to be a combination of light exposure during the night and a lack of light exposure in the morning. In addition to basic principles of morning light and an avoidance of nocturnal light exposure, presumable potential therapeutic approaches for asynchronization involve both conventional ones (light therapy, medications (hypnotics, antidepressants, melatonin, vitamin B12), physical activation, chronotherapy) and alternative ones (kampo, pulse therapy, direct contact, control of the autonomic nervous system, respiration (qigong, tanden breathing), chewing, crawling). A morning-type behavioral preference is described in several of the traditional textbooks for good health. The author recommends a morning-type behavioral lifestyle as a way to reduce behavioral/emotional problems, and to lessen the likelihood of falling into asynchronization.

Kripke, D. F. (2016). "Hypnotic drug risks of mortality, infection, depression, and cancer: but lack of benefit." F1000Res 5: 918.
	This is a review of hypnotic drug risks and benefits. Almost every month, new information appears about the risks of hypnotics (sleeping pills). The most important risks of hypnotics include excess mortality (especially overdose deaths, quiet deaths at night, and suicides), infections, cancer, depression, automobile crashes, falls, other accidents, and hypnotic-withdrawal insomnia. Short-term use of one-two prescriptions is associated with even greater risk per dose than long-term use. Hypnotics have usually been prescribed without approved indication, most often with specific contraindications, but even when indicated, there is little or no benefit. The recommended doses objectively increase sleep little if at all, daytime performance is often made worse (not better) and the lack of general health benefits is commonly misrepresented in advertising. Treatments such as the cognitive behavioral treatment of insomnia and bright light treatment of circadian rhythm disorders offer safer and more effective alternative approaches to insomnia.

Kurita, M., et al. (2016). "Non-24-hour sleep-wake syndrome improved by low-dose valproic acid: a case report." Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 12: 3199-3203.
	A woman was diagnosed with non-24-hour sleep-wake syndrome and depressive symptoms. Her depressive symptoms did not respond to standard doses of several antidepressants or mood stabilizers. Furthermore, her sleep-wake cycle remained non-entrained despite treatment with a melatonin-related drug, vitamin B12, and phototherapy. Ultimately, her sleep-wake rhythm was restored to a 24-hour pattern with a low dose of valproic acid, and her depressive symptoms tended to improve as a result of synchronization without antidepressants. Low-dose valproic acid appears to be one of the effective means of entraining circadian rhythms in patients with non-24-hour sleep-wake syndrome, which in turn likely improves associated depressive symptoms.

Labbate, L. A., et al. (1994). "Side effects induced by bright light treatment for seasonal affective disorder." J Clin Psychiatry 55(5): 189-191.
	BACKGROUND: Bright light treatment has become an accepted treatment for seasonal affective disorder (SAD), but there have been few studies about adverse effects from using this treatment. We conducted a study to examine the frequency of adverse effects of bright light treatment for SAD. METHOD: Thirty patients meeting DSM-III-R criteria for major depression, recurrent, with seasonal pattern as determined by the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-III-R were administered a structured interview, the 42-item Systematic Assessment for Treatment Emergent Events, to assess side effects from bright light treatment. RESULTS: Side effects were limited and mild. They remitted with time or decreased light. No patient discontinued treatment. One patient developed mild hypomania and 3 became agitated. Sleep disturbance occurred in 62% of patients (5 of 8) using evening light. Visual side effects occurred in 26% of patients (8 of 30). CONCLUSION: Except for one case of mild hypomania, no other clinically significant treatment-emergent adverse effects developed. Hypomania is an uncommon, but clinically important side effect. Mild visual complaints were common and remitted promptly. In this group of patients with SAD, bright light treatment was well tolerated and resulted in a limited number of adverse effects, none of which compromised treatment. The absence of a control group limits the specificity of these side effects to bright light treatment.

Lack, L. and H. Wright (1993). "The effect of evening bright light in delaying the circadian rhythms and lengthening the sleep of early morning awakening insomniacs." Sleep 16(5): 436-443.
	Past studies have predicted that early morning awakening insomnia is associated with advanced or early circadian rhythms. Because bright light stimulation in the evening can delay the phase of circadian rhythms, we tested its effects on nine (4 females, 5 males) early morning awakening insomniacs. Their sleep was evaluated with wrist actigraphy and their temperature and melatonin circadian rhythms were measured in constant routine procedures. In the initial evaluation, the temperature rhythm phase positions of these insomniacs did appear to be earlier than normal. The subjects were then exposed to bright light stimulation (2,500 lux) from 2000 to 2400 hours on two consecutive evenings. Following the evening bright light treatment, temperature rhythm phase markers were delayed 2-4 hours and melatonin phase markers were delayed 1-2 hours. Sleep onset times were not changed but the mean final wake-up time was delayed from 0459 hours to 0611 hours, resulting in a mean increase of total sleep time of > 1 hour. This pilot study suggests that evening bright light stimulation may be an effective nondrug treatment for early morning awakening insomnia.

Lack, L., et al. (2005). "The treatment of early-morning awakening insomnia with 2 evenings of bright light." Sleep 28(5): 616-623.
	STUDY OBJECTIVE: To assess the effectiveness of brief bright-light therapy for the treatment of early-morning awakening insomnia. PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-four healthy adults with early-morning awakening insomnia were assigned to either the bright-light condition (2,500-lux white light) or the control (dim red light) condition. MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: The circadian phase of rectal temperature and urinary melatonin rhythms were assessed with 26-hour constant routines before and after 2 evenings of light therapy. Sleep and daytime functioning were monitored using sleep diaries, activity monitors, and mood scales before light therapy and for 4 weeks during the follow-up period. While there were no significant circadian phase changes in the dim-light control group, the bright-light group had significant 2-hour phase delays of circadian temperature and melatonin rhythm. Compared to pretreatment measures, over the 4-week follow-up period, the bright-light group had a greater reduction of time awake after sleep onset, showed a trend toward waking later, and had a greater increase of total sleep time. Participants in the bright-light condition also tended to report greater reductions of negative daytime symptoms, including significantly fewer days of feeling depressed at the 4-week follow-up, as compared with the control group. CONCLUSION: Two evenings of bright-light exposure phase delayed the circadian rhythms of early-morning awakening insomniacs. It also improved diary and actigraphy sleep measures and improved some indexes of daytime functioning for up to 1 month after light exposure. The study suggests that a brief course of evening bright-light therapy can be an effective treatment for early-morning awakening insomniacs who have relatively phase advanced circadian rhythms.

Lack, L. C. and H. R. Wright (2007). "Treating chronobiological components of chronic insomnia." Sleep Med 8(6): 637-644.
	Circadian rhythms have a strong effect on the ability to sleep across the 24-h period. Maximum sleepiness occurs at the phase of lower endogenous core body temperature. This period is bracketed by two periods of alertness: a "wake-maintenance zone" occurring 6-10h before the time of core temperature minimum, and a "wake-up zone" occurring 4-7h after the minimum. Therefore, if the circadian rhythm drifts earlier with respect to the attempted sleep period, the wake-up zone can impinge on the end of the normal sleep period resulting in premature awakening and the development of early morning awakening insomnia. Similarly, a delay of the circadian rhythm can impose the wake-maintenance zone on the attempted bedtime and lead to sleep onset insomnia. Therefore, these two types of insomnia should be treatable with chronobiologic effects such as bright light and, possibly, melatonin administration. Bright light stimulation at normal wake-up time and melatonin administration 4-8h before normal bedtime can phase advance circadian rhythms to an earlier time. While morning bright light has been efficacious for sleep onset insomnia, evening melatonin administration has yet to be tested. Early morning awakening insomnia has been treated with phase delays imposed by evening bright light but not yet with morning melatonin administration. There is now sufficient evidence to warrant the consideration of chronobiologic manipulations such as bright light therapy for the treatment of chronic sleep onset and early morning awakening insomnia that show evidence of circadian delay or advance, respectively.

Lam, R. W., et al. (2006). "The Can-SAD study: a randomized controlled trial of the effectiveness of light therapy and fluoxetine in patients with winter seasonal affective disorder." Am J Psychiatry 163(5): 805-812.
	OBJECTIVE: Light therapy and antidepressants have shown comparable efficacy in separate studies of seasonal affective disorder treatment, but few studies have directly compared the two treatments. This study compared the effectiveness of light therapy and an antidepressant within a single trial. METHOD: This double-blind, randomized, controlled trial was conducted in four Canadian centers over three winter seasons. Patients met DSM-IV criteria for major depressive disorder with a seasonal (winter) pattern and had scores > or = 23 on the 24-item Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. After a baseline observation week, eligible patients were randomly assigned to 8 weeks of double-blind treatment with either 1) 10,000-lux light treatment and a placebo capsule, or 2) 100-lux light treatment (placebo light) and fluoxetine, 20 mg/day. Light treatment was applied for 30 minutes/day in the morning with a fluorescent white-light box; placebo light boxes used neutral density filters. RESULTS: A total of 96 patients were randomly assigned to a treatment condition. Intent-to-treat analysis showed overall improvement with time, with no differences between treatments. There were also no differences between the light and fluoxetine treatment groups in clinical response rates (67% for each group) or remission rates (50% and 54%, respectively). Post hoc testing found that light-treated patients had greater improvement at 1 week but not at other time points. Fluoxetine was associated with greater treatment-emergent adverse events (agitation, sleep disturbance, palpitations), but both treatments were generally well-tolerated with no differences in overall number of adverse effects. CONCLUSIONS: Light treatment showed earlier response onset and lower rate of some adverse events relative to fluoxetine, but there were no other significant differences in outcome between light therapy and antidepressant medication. Although limited by lack of a double-placebo condition, this study supports the effectiveness and tolerability of both treatments for seasonal affective disorder and suggests that other clinical factors, including patient preference, should guide selection of first-line treatment.

Landry, G. J. and T. Liu-Ambrose (2014). "Buying time: a rationale for examining the use of circadian rhythm and sleep interventions to delay progression of mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease." Front Aging Neurosci 6: 325.
	As of 2010, the worldwide economic impact of dementia was estimated at $604 billion USD; and without discovery of a cure or effective interventions to delay disease progression, dementia's annual global economic impact is expected to surpass $1 trillion USD as early as 2030. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the leading cause of dementia accounting for over 75% of all cases. Toxic accumulation of amyloid beta (Aβ), either by overproduction or some clearance failure, is thought to be an underlying mechanism of the neuronal cell death characteristic of AD-though this amyloid hypothesis has been increasingly challenged in recent years. A compelling alternative hypothesis points to chronic neuroinflammation as a common root in late-life degenerative diseases including AD. Apolipoprotein-E (APOE) genotype is the strongest genetic risk factor for AD: APOE-ε4 is proinflammatory and individuals with this genotype accumulate more Aβ, are at high risk of developing AD, and almost half of all AD patients have at least one ε4 allele. Recent studies suggest a bidirectional relationship exists between sleep and AD pathology. Sleep may play an important role in Aβ clearance, and getting good quality sleep vs. poor quality sleep might reduce the AD risk associated with neuroinflammation and the ε4 allele. Taken together, these findings are particularly important given the sleep disruptions commonly associated with AD and the increased burden disrupted sleep poses for AD caregivers. The current review aims to: (1) identify individuals at high risk for dementia who may benefit most from sleep interventions; (2) explore the role poor sleep quality plays in exacerbating AD type dementia; (3) examine the science of sleep interventions to date; and (4) provide a road map in pursuit of comprehensive sleep interventions, specifically targeted to promote cognitive function and delay progression of dementia.

Lee, S. Y., et al. (2013). "Bright light therapy to promote sleep in mothers of low-birth-weight infants: a pilot study." Biol Res Nurs 15(4): 398-406.
	Having a low-birth-weight (LBW) infant in a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) can intensify a mother's sleep disturbances due to both stress and the dim lighting in the ICU setting, which desynchronizes circadian rhythms. The purpose of this pilot study was to examine the effectiveness of a 3-week bright light therapy intervention on sleep and health outcomes of mothers with LBW infants in the NICU. Controlled stratified randomization was used to assign 30 mothers to a treatment or control group. Data were collected at pretreatment (second week postpartum) and after the 3-week intervention. Sleep data were assessed by wrist actigraph (total sleep time [TST], circadian activity rhythms [CARs]) and the General Sleep Disturbance scale. Other outcome variables were measured by the Lee's Fatigue scale, Edinburgh Postpartum Depression scale, and the Medical Outcomes Short Form 36, version 2. Mothers averaged 26.6 (SD = 6.3) years of age, and the majority were Black (73%). The mean gestational age for the infants was 27.7 (SD = 2.0) weeks. Small to large effect sizes were found when comparing the pre- to posttreatment differences between groups. Although none of the differences were statistically significant in this small sample, for mothers in the treatment group nocturnal TST (d = .33), CAR (d = 1.06), morning fatigue (d = .22), depressive symptoms (d = .40), physical health-related quality of life (d = .33), and mental health-related quality of life (d = .60) all improved compared to the control group. Bright light therapy is feasible for mothers with infants in an NICU. Clinically significant improvements have been evidenced; a larger-scale trial of effectiveness is needed.

Leger, D., et al. (2011). "Underexposure to light at work and its association to insomnia and sleepiness: a cross-sectional study of 13,296 workers of one transportation company." J Psychosom Res 70(1): 29-36.
	BACKGROUND: Light is a powerful synchronizer of the biological clock and of the sleep/wake cycle. Blind people have more sleep disturbances than people without eyesight problems. However, whether visually able people who are underexposed to bright natural light suffer from sleep wake disorders has never been examined. This study tried to assess the prevalence of sleep and wake disorders in subjects working in environments that are not exposed to natural light. METHODOLOGY: A setting-controlled cross-sectional epidemiological study was carried out. A representative sample of 13,296 French employees of a single transportation company participated in the study. During working hours, 4635 subjects (34.9%) experienced no light exposure (NLE) and 8661 were partially or completely exposed (LE) to natural light. Sleep disorders, sleep quality, and sleepiness were assessed using subjective tools: the Sleep Disorders Questionnaire-French version (SDQFV) and the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS). Light exposure was estimated on workers' schedules and by objective measurements of light intensity (lux meter). PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: On a univariate analysis, complaints of poor sleep and sleepiness were significantly higher in NLE workers compared to LE: nonrestorative sleep (36.8% vs. 29.5%; P<.0001), insomnia (28.8% vs. 24.8%; P<.0001), severe insomnia (14.1% vs. 10.9%; P<.0001), and daytime somnolence (6.8% vs. 4.3%; P<.0001). After multivariate analysis, NLE has shown more insomnia (OR=1.8, 95% CI 1.3-2.3, P<.01) and hypersomnia (OR=1.9, 95% CI=1.3-2.4, P<.01) than LE. SIGNIFICANCE: These data suggest that underexposure to natural light at work may significantly impair sleep and wake disorders in non-light-exposed workers.

Leggett, A. N., et al. (2018). "Bright Light as a Preventive Intervention for Depression in Late-Life: A Pilot Study on Feasibility, Acceptability, and Symptom Improvement." Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 26(5): 598-602.
	OBJECTIVES: We examined the feasibility and acceptability of a portable bright light intervention and its impact on sleep disturbance and depressive symptoms in older adults. METHODS: One-arm prevention intervention pilot study of the Re-Timer (Re-Timer Pty Ltd, Adelaide, Australia) bright light device (worn 30 minutes daily for 2 weeks) in 1 older adults (age 65 + years) with subsyndromal symptoms of depression and poor sleep quality. Participants were assessed on intervention acceptability and adherence, depressive symptoms (Patient Health Questionnaire- 9), and sleep (Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Insomnia Severity Index, actigraphy and daily diary reports). RESULTS: The Re-Timer device was rated positively by participants, and, on average, participants only missed 1 day of utilization. Although depressive symptoms declined and self-reported sleep improved, improvement was seen largely before the start of intervention. CONCLUSIONS: An effective preventive intervention that is targeted towards a high risk group of older adults has the potential to reduce distress and costly health service use.

Lei, H., et al. (2021). "Efficacy and safety evaluation of bright light therapy in patients with post-stroke insomnia: A protocol for systematic review and meta-analysis." Medicine (Baltimore) 100(50): e27937.
	BACKGROUND: Post-stroke insomnia (PSI) is a common and severe illness among the complications of stroke. Although there are plenty of drugs currently used for PSI treatment, they generate several side effects and other problems. Bright light therapy (BLT) is thought to be relatively safe and effective in treating PSI patients. Despite this, there is still a lack of systematic review on BLT in the treatment of PSI. Allowing for this, the aim of this study is to assess the efficacy and safety of BLT for PSI. METHODS: The meta-analysis and systematic review will perform a comprehensive electronic search for items fulfilling the required criteria in Web of Science, Google Scholar, Wan Fang database, MEDLINE, Baidu Scholar, PubMed, SinoMed, Embase, Chinese Biomedical Literature Database (CBM), China national knowledge infrastructure database (CNKI), Cochrane Library Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), and Wei Pu database from establishment to January 1, 2022. We will select articles, collect data, and assess the methodology quality. And we will set the primary outcome and secondary outcomes in this research. RevMan 5.3 software will be used to analyze the data for this investigation. RESULTS: The work of this research will be published in peer-reviewed scientific journals. CONCLUSION: The aim of this study is to assess the efficacy and safety of BLT for PSI and present robust scientific evidence concerning BLT for PSI. REGISTRATION: INPLASY2021100065.

Lemoine, P., et al. (2001). "[Sleep and aging]." Presse Med 30(9): 417-424.
	A COMMON DISORDER: Sleep is one of the most often altered functions in elderly people. Obviously, insomnia is one of the main complain, inducing benzodiazepine (BSD) abuse, but we must keep in mind that sleep apnoea syndrome (SAS) and restless legs syndrome (RLS) are also frequent in this group of age. After exclusion of the various age-related conditions that could induce sleep disorders, we must focalise on primary and secondary sleep disorders. As an introduction, methods of sleep analysis are described and qualitative and quantitative sleep variables are given. PHYSIOLOGICAL SLEEP: Comparing the sleep of elderly people to the one of young adult give us the opportunity to define the limits of the physiological sleep aging. It seems that the main age-induced sleep disturbances are problems to maintain sleep and chronobiological disorganisation of the sleep-wake rhythm, both responsible for insomnia complains. It is important to note that SAS and RLS prevalence are correlated with age. Also crucial is the complex association between sleep, depression and dementia. These interactions are addressed from a diagnostic and a therapeutic point of view. THERAPEUTIC APPROACH: Lastly, concerning insomnia we emphasise the importance of therapeutic alternative to BZD, responsible for addictions and cognitive impairment, mainly behavioural and chronotherapeutic methods (phototherapy, melatonin). For clinicians, it is recommended to respect the individual rhythms of each elderly patient and to prefer nonpharmacological methods.

Li, D., et al. (2022). "The Clinical Effect of Blue Light Therapy on Patients with Delayed Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder." Nat Sci Sleep 14: 75-82.
	OBJECTIVE: To investigate the feasibility and patient acceptance of applying blue light glasses to treat delayed sleep-wake phase disorder (DSWPD). METHODS: Fifteen patients with DSWPD were collected as the observation group and 15 healthy people as the control group. The patients wore blue light glasses with a continuous radiation wavelength of about 470 nm for 1h to 2h during the period from 06:30 to 09:00 in the morning after waking up, respectively. Assessment of Hamilton Anxiety Scale 14 items (HAMA14), Hamilton Depression Rating Scale 24 items (HAMD24), Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS), Morningness-Eveningness Questionnaire (MEQ), and Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) scores before and after 1 week of treatment. Pearson correlation was used to analyze the correlation between the efficacy of patients with sleep-wake phase delay disorder and HAMA14, HAMD24, PSQI, ISI, ESS, MEQ, SL (sleep time), TST (total sleep time), TTiB (total time in bed), SQ (sleep quality), TOA (total arousal time), WASO (wake after sleep onset), AAT (average arousal time), and SE (sleep efficiency percent). Multi-factor logistic regression analysis of factors influencing the efficacy of patients with sleep-wake phase delay disorder. RESULTS: After treatment, PSQI-G scores, number of nighttime awakenings and time of awakening recorded in the sleep diary decreased significantly in the observation group (P < 0.05), and subjective sleep quality and MEQ scores increased (P < 0.05). MEQ score shifted from "moderate night type" to "intermediate type", sleep-wake phase tended to shift forward. The total PSQI score and Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index Global (PSQI-G) score were significantly lower in the control group after treatment (P < 0.05). By Pearson correlation analysis, the efficacy of patients with sleep-wake phase delay disorder was significantly correlated with HAMA14, HAMD24, PSQI, ISI, ESS, MEQ, SL, TST, TTiB, SQ, TOA, WASO, AAT, and SE. Multifactorial logistic regression analysis revealed that the factors influencing the efficacy of patients with sleep-wake phase delay disorder were PSQI, ISI, ESS, MEQ, SL, TST, TTiB, SQ, TOA, WASO, AAT, and SE. CONCLUSION: Blue light therapy has a positive effect on improving subjective sleep quality, reducing the number of nocturnal awakenings and the duration of nocturnal awakenings, improving daytime function, and shifting the sleep phase forward in patients with DSWPD. Blue light therapy improves subjective sleep quality and daytime function the following day in normal individuals.

Li, J., et al. (2018). "Sleep Among Long-Term Care Residents in China: A Narrative Review of Literature." Clin Nurs Res 27(1): 35-60.
	The objective of this study is to synthesize and evaluate the current body of sleep research among long-term care (LTC) residents in China and provide insights for future research. Systematic searches identified 15 studies that examined sleep in LTC residents in China. Sleep disturbances and poor sleep quality were prevalent in Chinese LTC residents. Eight cross-sectional studies reported that demographics, comorbidities, lifestyle, and environment were associated with sleep quality in Chinese LTC residents. Seven intervention studies, including exercise, traditional Chinese medicine, light therapy, and behavioral interventions resulted in improved sleep quality. Only subjective sleep measures were used in all 15 studies. Some methodological issues were identified in studies, especially those conducted in Mainland China. Sleep research in LTC residents in China is still at the beginning stages. Future studies should consider more rigorous designs and objective sleep measures, and develop target interventions based on factors associated with sleep disturbances.

Lin, F., et al. (2021). "The effects of bright light therapy on depression and sleep disturbances in patients with Parkinson's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials." Sleep Med 83: 280-289.
	BACKGROUND: Depression and sleep disturbance are well-recognized non-motor features in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD). This meta-analysis aimed to explore the potential role of bright light therapy (BLT) in depression and sleep disturbances in Parkinson's Disease (PD). METHODS: Four databases were independently searched by two reviewers: PubMed, Cochrane, Web of Science and Embase until February 2021. We evaluated the following depression related scales: Beck's Depression Inventory (BDI); the Geriatric Depression Rating Scale, 30-item (GDS-30); the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS); the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS); the Epworth sleepiness scale (ESS); the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS); the Pittsburgh sleep quality index (PSQI); the Parkinson's disease sleep scale (PDSS); Scales for Outcomes in Parkinson's disease Sleep Scale (SCOPA) and the Insomnia severity index (ISI) to access the effects of bright light therapy on depression and sleep disturbances in patients with PD. Effect size (standardized mean deviation [SMD] and 95% confidence interval [CI]) were used to analyze the continuous results data of intervention group and control light group. Data from five randomized, controlled trials totaling 173 patients with PD was included. RESULTS: BLT significantly improved depression symptoms (BDI, GDS-30, HDRS and HADS) of PD patients (0.34, 95% CI = 0.06-0.61). Insomnia symptoms (SCOPA and ISI) for patients with PD were significantly improved by BLT as well (1.15, 95% CI = 0.71-1.60). Whereas, no difference was observed in the control light group in improving the depression or insomnia symptoms of PD patients. CONCLUSION: BLT is an effective intervention for improving depressive symptoms and sleep disturbances in patients with PD.

Lin, T. H., et al. (2022). "The effect of bright light therapy in migraine patients with sleep disturbance: A prospective, observational cohort study protocol." Front Aging Neurosci 14: 1041076.
	BACKGROUND: Migraine is a common disabling disorder, and its substantial burden is associated with a considerable negative impact on the patients' quality of life. Moreover, aging patients with migraine have more cognitive complaints. Additionally, the elderly are more likely to have sleep disturbances, which may also predict the risk of incident dementia. Migraines are reported to be closely associated with sleep and circadian rhythms. Sleep disturbance is a well-known trigger for migraine episodes; moreover, shift work or jet lag reportedly triggers some migraines. The hypothalamus is thought to be the migraine generator; sleep and circadian activity rhythm are also controlled by the hypothalamus. Evidence suggests an influence of both sleep and circadian system on migraine. Previously, light therapy has been show to stabilize sleep architecture and further improve insomnia related to circadian rhythm disorders. However, the beneficial effect of light therapy on migraine with sleep disturbance has not yet been determined. We aim to explore the effects of light therapy for migraine combined with sleep disturbance. METHODS AND ANALYSIS: This project is a 2-year, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. The study design includes a 4-week monitoring period (baseline and pretest), a 4-week treatment period, and a posttest. The study participants will undergo assessments on headache frequency and severity and subjective and objective (wrist actigraphy and polysomnography) sleep disturbances, and quality of life and a series of blood tests for serum biomarkers. DISCUSSION: This study will establish evidence-based alternative medicine for the preventive effect of bright light therapy in migraine patients with sleep disturbances. Moreover, our data will be useful to comprehend the biochemical mechanism of light therapy in migraine prevention.Clinical Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT04890691.

Lingjaerde, O., et al. (1985). "Insomnia during the "dark period" in northern Norway. An explorative, controlled trial with light treatment." Acta Psychiatr Scand 71(5): 506-512.
	Midwinter insomnia (MI) is an initial type insomnia that is typically seen north of the Polar Circle during the "dark period", when the sun does not rise above the horizon. The cause of MI is not known, but it seems reasonable to assume that it is the expression of a phase delay of the sleep-wake cycle, due to lack of the entraining effect of normal daylight. Based on his hypothesis, we have studied the effect of intensive light exposure (2000-2500 lux for half an hour between 7.30 and 8.30 a.m. for 5 days) on selected sleep and endocrinological variables (the latter will be reported elsewhere) in nine subjects with typical MI and eight healthy controls. After light exposure, the MI subjects had a significantly shortened sleep latency and a nonsignificant increase in total sleep time. Before light exposure, the MI subjects reported significantly less drowsiness in the evening than in the morning, whereas the opposite was true after light exposure. No significant changes were seen in the control group. The results of this study give some support to the delayed phase hypothesis.

Livingston, G., et al. (2019). "DREAMS-START (Dementia RElAted Manual for Sleep; STrAtegies for RelaTives) for people with dementia and sleep disturbances: a single-blind feasibility and acceptability randomized controlled trial." Int Psychogeriatr 31(2): 251-265.
	ABSTRACTBackground:40% of people with dementia have disturbed sleep but there are currently no known effective treatments. Studies of sleep hygiene and light therapy have not been powered to indicate feasibility and acceptability and have shown 40-50% retention. We tested the feasibility and acceptability of a six-session manualized evidence-based non-pharmacological therapy; Dementia RElAted Manual for Sleep; STrAtegies for RelaTives (DREAMS-START) for sleep disturbance in people with dementia. METHODS: We conducted a parallel, two-armed, single-blind randomized trial and randomized 2:1 to intervention: Treatment as Usual. Eligible participants had dementia and sleep disturbances (scoring ≥4 on one Sleep Disorders Inventory item) and a family carer and were recruited from two London memory services and Join Dementia Research. Participants wore an actiwatch for two weeks pre-randomization. Trained, clinically supervised psychology graduates delivered DREAMS-START to carers randomized to intervention; covering Understanding sleep and dementia; Making a plan (incorporating actiwatch information, light exposure using a light box); Daytime activity and routine; Difficult night-time behaviors; Taking care of your own (carer's) sleep; and What works? Strategies for the future. Carers kept their manual, light box, and relaxation recordings post-intervention. Outcome assessment was masked to allocation. The co-primary outcomes were feasibility (≥50% eligible people consenting to the study) and acceptability (≥75% of intervention group attending ≥4 intervention sessions). RESULTS: In total, 63out of 95 (66%; 95% CI: 56-76%) eligible referrals consented between 04/08/2016 and 24/03/2017; 62 (65%; 95% CI: 55-75%) were randomized, and 37 out of 42 (88%; 95% CI: 75-96%) adhered to the intervention. CONCLUSIONS: DREAM-START for sleep disorders in dementia is feasible and acceptable.

Loving, R. T., et al. (2005). "Bright light treatment of depression for older adults [ISRCTN55452501]." BMC Psychiatry 5: 41.
	BACKGROUND: The incidence of insomnia and depression in the elder population is significant. It is hoped that use of light treatment for this group could provide safe, economic, and effective rapid recovery. METHODS: In this home-based trial we treated depressed elderly subjects with bright white (8,500 Lux) and dim red (<10 Lux) light for one hour a day at three different times (morning, mid-wake and evening). A placebo response washout was used for the first week. Wake treatment was conducted prior to the initiation of treatment, to explore antidepressant response and the interaction with light treatment. Urine and saliva samples were collected during a 24-hour period both before and after treatment and assayed for aMT6s and melatonin respectively to observe any change in circadian timing. Subjects wore a wrist monitor to record light exposure and wrist activity. Daily log sheets and weekly mood (GDS) and physical symptom (SAFTEE) scales were administered. Each subject was given a SCID interview and each completed a mood questionnaire (SIGH-SAD-SR) before and after treatment. Also, Hamilton Depression Rating (SIGH-SAD version) interviews were conducted by a researcher who was blind to the treatment condition. A control group of healthy, age-matched, volunteers was studied for one day to obtain baseline data for comparison of actigraphy and hormone levels. RESULTS: Eighty-one volunteers, between 60 and 79 years old, completed the study. Both treatment and placebo groups experienced mood improvement. Average GDS scores improved 5 points, the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS) 17 scores (extracted from the self-rated SIGH-SAD-SR) improved 6 points. There were no significant treatment effects or time-by-treatment interactions. No significant adverse reactions were observed in either treatment group. The assays of urine and saliva showed no significant differences between the treatment and placebo groups. The healthy control group was active earlier and slept earlier but received less light than the depressed group at baseline. CONCLUSION: Antidepressant response to bright light treatment in this age group was not statistically superior to placebo. Both treatment and placebo groups experienced a clinically significant overall improvement of 16%.

Lowe, A., et al. (2022). "Treatment of sleep disturbance following stroke and traumatic brain injury: a systematic review of conservative interventions." Disabil Rehabil 44(13): 2975-2987.
	PURPOSE: Sleep disorders are common following stroke and traumatic brain injury. We present a systematic review of the literature investigating conservative interventions to improve sleep in these populations. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The PRISMA statement was used. Embase, PubMed, and the Cochrane library were searched for all experimental studies published prior to 28th March 2020 that assessed conservative interventions to improve the sleep or sleep disorders of adults with a history of stroke or traumatic brain injury (TBI). Two authors reviewed publications of interest and risk of bias assessments were performed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool or the Methodological Index for Non-Randomised Studies instrument. RESULTS: Twenty-three publications were included in this systematic review. Meta-analyses were not performed due to study heterogeneity. Psychotherapy-based approaches might be useful for sleep disturbance after TBI and acupuncture may help improve insomnia or sleep disturbance following stroke or TBI, respectively. The evidence was less clear for morning bright light therapy and exercise. Limitations included a single author performing primary searches, only English publications, the reporting of secondary outcome measures, and sleep disorder diagnoses. CONCLUSIONS: Some conservative interventions might be useful for improving sleep disturbance or disorders in these populations, but further research is required.IMPLICATIONS FOR REHABILITATIONSleep disturbance is common following stroke and traumatic brain injury, with insomnia and obstructive sleep apnoea being the most frequently diagnosed sleep disorders.Psychotherapy-based approaches might be useful for sleep disturbance after TBI and acupuncture may help improve insomnia or sleep disturbance following stroke or TBI, respectively.Morning bright light therapy appeared to be more beneficial for fatigue rather than sleep disturbance after TBI, and the evidence for exercise was less clear.

Luca, A., et al. (2013). "Sleep disorders and depression: brief review of the literature, case report, and nonpharmacologic interventions for depression." Clin Interv Aging 8: 1033-1039.
	Sleep disorders are so frequently associated with depression that, in the absence of sleep complaints, a diagnosis of depression should be made with caution. Insomnia, in particular, may occur in 60%-80% of depressed patients. Depressive symptoms are important risk factors for insomnia, and depression is considered an important comorbid condition in patients with chronic insomnia of any etiology. In addition, some drugs commonly prescribed for the treatment of depression may worsen insomnia and impair full recovery from the illness. The aim of this paper is to review briefly and discuss the following topics: common sleep disturbances during depression (in particular pavor nocturnus, nightmares, hypersomnia, and insomnia); circadian sleep disturbances; and treatment of depression by manipulation of the sleep-wake rhythm (chronotherapy, light therapy, cycles of sleep, and manipulation of the sleep-wake rhythm itself). Finally, we present a case report of a 65-year-old Caucasian woman suffering from insomnia associated with depression who was successfully treated with sleep deprivation.

Ludwig, V. M., et al. (2022). "[Chronotherapy of affective disorders: principles and clinical aspects]." Nervenarzt 93(9): 892-900.
	BACKGROUND: Chronobiological processes play a critical role in the initial manifestation and course of affective disorders. Chronotherapeutic agents aim to improve sleep-wake cycle disturbances and affective symptoms by modulating the chronobiological neuronal circuitry. OBJECTIVE: To review the different chronotherapeutic procedures, the current evidence situation and recommendations for clinical applications. METHOD: Narrative review. RESULTS: Chronotherapeutic interventions for patients with affective disorders can be nonpharmacological, e.g., light therapy, sleep deprivation, sleep phase advance and dark therapy, pharmacological in the form of melatonin and psychological consisting of interpersonal and social rhythm therapy or cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia modified for patients with bipolar disorder. Nearly all these interventions show promising data regarding their efficacy in acute depressive or manic episodes or as maintenance therapy. For melatonin, there is less evidence for improvement of affective symptoms than for stabilizing the sleep-wake cycle. Some interventions are well-suited for an outpatient setting, e.g., light therapy, dark therapy and psychotherapy, while others, such as triple chronotherapy consisting of sleep deprivation, sleep phase advance and light therapy, are more suited for in-patient treatment. CONCLUSION: Chronotherapeutic interventions are versatile in their application and can be combined with each other and used concomitantly with classical psychopharmacotherapy. With a benign side effect profile and good evidence for efficacy, they could play an important role in the treatment of affective disorders; however, this potential is used too rarely in the clinical context.

Lushington, K. and L. Lack (2002). "Non-pharmacological treatments of insomnia." Isr J Psychiatry Relat Sci 39(1): 36-49.
	Insomnia is a prevalent and complex disorder to treat. This article reviews the prevalence, etiology, diagnosis and treatment of insomnia. With regard to treatment, there now exists an extensive literature demonstrating that compared with pharmacological treatments a range of non-pharmacological therapies are of proven clinical efficacy and durability. These include, for example, stimulus control therapy, bedtime restriction therapy, relaxation therapy, cognitive therapy and bright light therapy. These therapies are summarized and evaluated. It is recommended that therapists consider non-drug treatments based on cognitive-behavioral principles when managing a patient with insomnia.

Maccora, J., et al. (2023). "Mechanisms of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy and Light Therapy for Cancer-Related Insomnia: A Randomized Clinical Trial during Chemotherapy for Breast Cancer." Behav Sleep Med 21(3): 227-241.
	STUDY OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate the mechanisms of a combined brief cognitive behavioral plus bright light therapy (CBT-I+Light) in women receiving chemotherapy. METHODS: Women (N = 101) were randomly assigned to CBT-I+Light or treatment as usual plus relaxation audios (TAU+). Participants completed sleep diaries and wore an actigraph during the 6-week intervention period. Patient-reported outcomes were assessed at baseline, mid-point (week 3), and later (week 6). Cognitive (i.e., dysfunctional sleep beliefs, pre-sleep cognitions, and arousal) and behavioral (i.e., time in bed awake and day-to-day out-of-bedtime variability) mechanisms were examined. RESULTS: Cognitively, both groups declined significantly in overall dysfunctional sleep beliefs from pre- to post-intervention (both p< .04); however, they did not differ on sleep-related beliefs nor pre-sleep cognitions and arousal at post-intervention (both p> .50). Dysfunctional beliefs sleep expectations subscale was lower in CBT-I+Light versus TAU+ (p= .01). Behaviorally, CBT-I+Light reported less overall time in bed awake after the start of the intervention (p< .05) and significantly less time in bed during the morning until the final week of the intervention period. Out-of-bedtime day-to-day variability was lower in the CBT-+Light vs TAU+ at the final intervention day. CONCLUSION: Mechanisms of CBT-I+Light during chemotherapy remain to be shown. Our results suggest that changes in behavioral mechanisms may be associated with sleep improvements within this cohort. Future studies should assess the role of additional mechanisms (e.g., sleep effort) within larger samples. Whilst intervention brevity is important, more potent interventions may be required to achieve robust changes in target mechanisms.

Maccora, J., et al. (2022). "The Sleep, Cancer and Rest (SleepCaRe) Trial: Rationale and design of a randomized, controlled trial of cognitive behavioral and bright light therapy for insomnia and fatigue in women with breast cancer receiving chemotherapy." Contemp Clin Trials 120: 106877.
	BACKGROUND: Insomnia and fatigue symptoms are common in breast cancer. Active cancer treatment, such as chemotherapy, appears to be particularly disruptive to sleep. Yet, sleep complaints often go unrecognised and under treated within routine cancer care. The abbreviated delivery of cognitive behavioral therapy for Insomnia (CBTI) and bright light therapy (BLT) may offer accessible and cost-effective sleep treatments in women receiving chemotherapy for breast cancer. METHODS: The Sleep, Cancer and Rest (SleepCaRe) Trial is a 6-month multicentre, randomized, controlled, 2 × 2 factorial, superiority, parallel group trial. Women receiving cytotoxic chemotherapy for breast cancer at tertiary Australian hospitals will be randomly assigned 1:1:1:1 to one of four, non-pharmacological sleep interventions: (a) Sleep Hygiene and Education (SHE); (b) CBTI; (c) BLT; (d) CBT-I + BLT combined and simultaneously delivered. Each sleep intervention is delivered over 6 weeks, and will comprise an introductory session, a mid-point phone call, and regular emails. The primary (insomnia, fatigue) and secondary (health-related quality of life, rest activity rhythms, sleep-related impairment) outcomes will be assessed via online questionnaires at five time-points: baseline (t0, prior to intervention), mid-point intervention (t2, Week 4), post-intervention (t3, Week 7), 3-months (t4, Week 18), and 6-months follow-up (t5, Week 30). CONCLUSIONS: This study will report novel data concerning the comparative and combined efficacy of CBT-I and BLT during chemotherapy. Findings will contribute to the development of evidence-based early sleep and fatigue intervention during chemotherapy for breast cancer. Clinical trial information Registered with the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (http://anzctr.org.au/), Registration Number: ACTRN12620001133921.

Madsen, H., et al. (2021). "Light therapy for seasonal affective disorder in visual impairment and blindness - a pilot study." Acta Neuropsychiatr 33(4): 191-199.
	OBJECTIVE: Seasonal and non-seasonal depression are prevalent conditions in visual impairment (VI). We assessed the effects and side effects of light therapy in persons with severe VI/blindness who experienced recurrent depressive symptoms in winter corresponding to seasonal affective disorder (SAD) or subsyndromal SAD (sSAD). RESULTS: We included 18 persons (11 with severe VI, 3 with light perception and 4 with no light perception) who met screening criteria for sSAD/SAD in a single-arm, assessor-blinded trial of 6 weeks light therapy. In the 12 persons who completed the 6 weeks of treatment, the post-treatment depression score was reduced (p < 0.001), and subjective wellbeing (p = 0.01) and sleep quality were improved (p = 0.03). In 6/12 participants (50%), the post-treatment depression score was below the cut-off set for remission. In four participants with VI, side effects (glare or transiently altered visual function) led to dropout or exclusion. CONCLUSION: Light therapy was associated with a reduction in depressive symptoms in persons with severe VI/blindness. Eye safety remains a concern in persons with residual sight.

Maiello, M., et al. (2019). "Transcranial Photobiomodulation with Near-Infrared Light for Generalized Anxiety Disorder: A Pilot Study." Photobiomodul Photomed Laser Surg 37(10): 644-650.
	Objective: Our aim was to test the anxiolytic effect of transcranial photobiomodulation (t-PBM) with near-infrared light (NIR) in subjects suffering from generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). Background: t-PBM with NIR is an experimental, noninvasive treatment for mood and anxiety disorders. Preliminary evidence indicates a potential anxiolytic effect of transcranial NIR. Methods: Fifteen subjects suffering from GAD were recruited in an open-label 8-week study. Each participant self-administered t-PBM daily, for 20 min (continuous wave; 830 nm peak wavelength; average irradiance 30 mW/cm(2); average fluence 36 J/cm(2); total energy delivered per session 2.9 kJ: total output power 2.4 W) broadly on the forehead (total area 80 cm(2)) with an LED-cluster headband (Cerebral Sciences). Outcome measures were the reduction in total scores of the Hamilton Anxiety Scale (SIGH-A), the Clinical Global Impressions-Severity (CGI-S) subscale and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) subscales from baseline to last observation carried forward. Results: Of the 15 recruited subjects (mean age 30 ± 14 years; 67% women), 12 (80%) completed the open trial. Results show a significant reduction in the total scores of SIGH-A (from 17.27 ± 4.89 to 8.47 ± 4.87; p < 0.001; Cohen's d effect size = 1.47), in the CGI-S subscale (from 4.53 ± 0.52 to 2.87 ± 0.83; p < 0.001; Cohen's d effect size = 2.04), as well as significant improvements in sleep at the PSQI. t-PBM was well tolerated with no serious adverse events. Conclusions: Based on our pilot study, t-PBM with NIR is a promising alternative treatment for GAD. Larger, randomized, double-blind, sham-controlled studies are needed.

Malhotra, R. and A. Y. Avidan (2012). "Neurodegenerative Disease and REM Behavior Disorder." Curr Treat Options Neurol 14(5): 474-492.
	Patients with cerebral degenerative conditions commonly suffer from a variety of sleep disorders, including sleep-disordered breathing, insomnia, parasomnias (REM sleep behavior disorder), circadian rhythm disturbances, and restless legs syndrome. When these sleep disorders go unrecognized and untreated, they can lead to decreased quality of life and worsening neurological symptoms related to the underlying condition. Appropriate management initially requires taking a careful history from the patient and bed partner regarding their sleep. In addition, polysomnography may be required to aid in the diagnosis of sleep-disordered breathing or parasomnias. Occasionally, adjusting the dosages of sedating or sleep disrupting medications and improving sleep hygiene may improve sleep complaints. However, in most cases restoring quality nighttime sleep requires specific therapeutic intervention. In patients that suffer from sleep apnea, this usually means treatment with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), positional therapy, dental appliances, upper airway surgery, or weight loss. Pharmacological treatment of insomnia in patients with cerebral degenerative conditions can be difficult due to side effects (worsening balance, cognition) and lack of data in this patient population. Behavioral strategies such as cognitive-behavioral therapy have been effective and are considered safer than hypnotic therapy, but can be limited due to access to trained providers (distance and number of providers) and limited cognitive functioning of the patient. Parasomnias, namely REM sleep behavior disorder, are managed by looking for any underlying cause of arousals (sleep apnea, periodic leg movements of sleep), implementing safety precautions, and pharmacologically with either benzodiazepines or melatonin. Restless legs syndrome may improve with iron replacement or dopamine agonist therapy, as it does in other patient populations. Light therapy may be beneficial in patients suffering from circadian rhythm disorders such as advanced sleep phase syndrome.

Mancuso, J. B., et al. (2021). "Management of Severe Atopic Dermatitis in Pediatric Patients." J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 9(4): 1462-1471.
	Atopic dermatitis is a common, chronic inflammatory skin disorder, present in about 12% of children worldwide. Optimizing management of severe atopic dermatitis in pediatric patients is critical to reduce signs of inflammation, alleviate pruritus and sleep disturbance, minimize the development and/or impact of comorbidities, and improve the patient and caregiver's quality of life. Evaluating the longitudinal severity of pediatric atopic dermatitis is an important component of measuring therapeutic response and long-term management, and is different in clinical practice versus clinical trials. This article describes when and how to use different treatments for pediatric patients with severe atopic dermatitis, including topical medications, phototherapy, and systemic medical therapies (traditional immunosuppressants, biologics, and small molecule inhibitors). It also provides recommendations useful in clinical practice for nonpharmacologic interventions for pediatric patients with severe atopic dermatitis.

Marde, V. S., et al. (2022). "Alzheimer's disease and sleep disorders: Insights into the possible disease connections and the potential therapeutic targets." Asian J Psychiatr 68: 102961.
	One of the comorbid conditions in an individual with Alzheimer's disease is a sleep disorder. Clinical features of sleep disorders involve various sleep disturbances such as Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSAS), Excessive Daytime Sleepiness (EDS), Rapid Eye Movement (REM), Breathing Disorders, Periodic limb movements in sleep (PLMS), etc. The primary tools used for the identification of such disturbances are Polysomnography (PSG) and Wrist actigraphy. This review will highlight and explains the different approaches used in the treatment of sleep disorders. Non-pharmacological treatments include Peter Hauri rules, sleep education program, and light therapy which play a key role in the regulation of sleep-wake cycles. Pharmacological therapy described in this article may be useful in treating sleep destruction in patients with Alzheimer's disease. Along with the Non-pharmacological and pharmacological treatment, here we discuss five commonly recognized plant-based nutraceuticals with hypothesized impact on sleep disorders: caffeine, chamomile, cherries, L-tryptophan, and valerian by the proper emphasis on the known mechanism of their action.

Marin, L., et al. (2023). "Sleep Disturbances in At-Risk Mental States and First Episode of Psychosis: A Narrative Review on Interventions." Clocks Sleep 5(2): 249-259.
	Sleep disturbances are a common yet often overlooked symptom of psychosis that can drastically affect the quality of life and well-being of those living with the condition. Sleep disorders are common in people diagnosed with schizophrenia and have significant negative effects on the clinical course of the illness and the functional outcomes and quality of life of patients. There is a limited number of studies addressing this question in first-episode psychosis (FEP). In this narrative review, we aimed to provide an overview of sleep disorders in populations with FEP and at-risk mental states (ARMS). The review was focused on the various treatments currently used for sleep disorders, including both non-pharmacological and pharmacological treatments. A total of 48 studies were included. We found that sleep disturbances are associated with attenuated psychotic symptoms and other psychopathological symptoms in ARMSs. The association of sleep disturbances with the transition to psychosis has been poorly investigated. Sleep disturbances have an impact on the quality of life and the psychopathological symptoms of people suffering from FEP. The non-pharmacological treatments include cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia, bright light therapy, cognitive restructuring techniques, sleep restriction therapy, basic sleep hygiene education, and the provision of portable sleep trackers. Other treatments include antipsychotics in acute phases and melatonin. The early intervention in sleep disturbances may improve overall prognosis in emerging psychosis populations.

Mariotti, P., et al. (2003). "Sleep disorders in Sanfilippo syndrome: a polygraphic study." Clin Electroencephalogr 34(1): 18-22.
	OBJECTIVE: A high prevalence of sleep disorders is reported in patients affected by Mucopolysaccharidosis III (Sanfilippo syndrome). These disorders have never been investigated by prolonged, objective, and instrumental evaluations. The present work is based on sleep duration and structure in Sanfilippo patients. STUDY DESIGN: The features of sleep/wake cycle in 6 Sanfilippo patients and 6 healthy controls were evaluated by means of sleep diaries and 48 hour ambulatory EEG and polygraphic recordings. Statistical analysis was performed by means of the U-test (Mann-Whitney). RESULTS: Four out of six Sanfilippo patients, the oldest patients in our sample, showed an extremely irregular sleep pattern, with several sleep episodes of inconstant duration, irregularly distributed along 24 hours. The two younger patients showed sleep maintenance insomnia with several nocturnal awakenings. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that sleep disruption in Sanfilippo syndrome consists of an irregular sleep/wake pattern, which at its onset might appear as a disorder of initiating or maintaining sleep. This could explain why same patients do not respond to conventional hypnotics. The present observation might suggest attempting therapies aimed at resynchronization, such as behavioral treatment, light therapy or melatonin.

Martino, J. K., et al. (2018). "The effect of light exposure on insomnia and nocturnal movement in Parkinson's disease: an open label, retrospective, longitudinal study." Sleep Med 44: 24-31.
	Insomnia, hypersomnia and REM Sleep Behavior Disorder (RSBD) during sleep are major problems for patients suffering from Parkinson's disease (PD) but they are also used to predict its onset. While these secondary symptoms detract from the quality of life in PD patients, few treatment options are available due to limited efficacy or risk of complicating the treatment regimen. Light therapy (LT) has been suggested as a strategy for sleep disorders but it has only been implemented recently for use in PD. An open label, retrospective study was undertaken where PD patients had been undergoing LT, using polychromatic light, for four months to 15 years prior. It was found that 1 h exposure to light, just prior to retiring, significantly improved insomnia and reduced RSBD in as little as one month after commencing LT. In addition, the improvement was maintained as long as LT was continued over a four to six year period. The efficacy of LT in alleviating these sleep related conditions was not compromised by time since diagnosis or age of the patient. These results intimate the value of long term application of non-invasive techniques such as LT for treating sleep disorders in PD and justify further controlled trials on the long term efficacy of LT.

Mayer, G., et al. (2021). "Insomnia in neurological diseases." Neurol Res Pract 3(1): 15.
	Insomnia is defined as difficulties of initiating and maintaining sleep, early awakening and poor subjective sleep quality despite adequate opportunity and circumstances for sleep with impairment of daytime performance. These components of insomnia - namely persistent sleep difficulties despite of adequate sleep opportunity resulting in daytime dysfunction - appear secondary or co-morbid to neurological diseases. Comorbid insomnia originates from neurodegenerative, inflammatory, traumatic or ischemic changes in sleep regulating brainstem and hypothalamic nuclei with consecutive changes of neurotransmitters. Symptoms of neurological disorders (i.e motor deficits), co-morbidities (i.e. pain, depression, anxiety) and some disease-specific pharmaceuticals may cause insomnia and/or other sleep problems.This guideline focuses on insomnias in headaches, neurodegenerative movement disorders, multiple sclerosis, traumatic brain injury, epilepsies, stroke, neuromuscular disease and dementia.The most important new recommendations are: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBTi) is recommended to treat acute and chronic insomnia in headache patients. Insomnia is one of the most frequent sleep complaints in neurodegenerative movement disorders. Patients may benefit from CBTi, antidepressants (trazodone, doxepin), melatonin and gaba-agonists. Insomnia is a frequent precursor of MS symptoms by up to 10 years. CBTi is recommended in patients with MS, traumatic brain injury and. Melatonin may improve insomnia symptoms in children with epilepsies. Patients with insomnia after stroke can be treated with benzodiazepine receptor agonists and sedating antidepressants. For patients with dementia suffering from insomnia trazodone, light therapy and physical exercise are recommended.

Mayer, G., et al. (2011). "Insomnia in central neurologic diseases--occurrence and management." Sleep Med Rev 15(6): 369-378.
	The objective of this review is to highlight the impact of insomnia in central neurological disorders by providing information on its prevalence and give recommendations for diagnosis and treatment. Insomnia in neurological disorders is a frequent, but underestimated symptom. Its occurrence may be a direct consequence of the disease itself or may be secondary to pain, depression, other sleep disorders or the effects of medications. Insomnia can have a significant impact on the patient's cognitive and physical function and may be associated with psychological distress and depression. Diagnosis of insomnia is primarily based on medical history and validated questionnaires. Actigraphy is a helpful diagnostic tool for assessing the circadian sleep-wake rhythm. For differential diagnosis and to measure the duration of sleep full polysomnography may be recommended. Prior to initiating treatment the cause of insomnia must be clearly identified. First line treatment aims at the underlying neurologic disease. The few high quality treatment studies show that short term treatment with hypnotics may be recommended in most disorders after having ruled out high risk for adverse effects. Sedating antidepressants may be an effective treatment for insomnia in stroke and Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. Melatonin and light treatment can stabilize the sleep-wake circadian rhythm and shorten sleep latency in dementias and PD. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) can be effective in treating insomnia symptoms associated with most of the central neurological diseases. The prevalence and treatment of insomnia in neurological diseases still need to be studied in larger patient groups with randomized clinical trials to a) better understand their impact and causal relationship and b) to develop and improve specific evidence-based treatment strategies.

McCarty, D. E. (2010). "Ready for takeoff? A critical review of armodafinil and modafinil for the treatment of sleepiness associated with jet lag." Nat Sci Sleep 2: 85-94.
	Jet lag syndrome (JLS) is a clinical syndrome of disrupted nocturnal sleep and daytime neurocognitive impairment which occurs in the context of rapid transmeridian travel. Many strategies for treatment of JLS exist, and include hypnotics to enhance nocturnal sleep, chronotherapeutic approaches (eg, light therapy, melatonin, or gradual schedule shifting), and alerting agents to counter daytime sleepiness. Safety concerns have prompted renewed interest in managing JLS-associated excessive daytime sleepiness (JLSAEDS). Off-label use of the newer alerting agents modafinil and armodafinil is increasing for this indication, often at the specific request of patients. In order to better evaluate the potential risks and benefits of these medications for the management of JLSAEDS, clinicians must be aware of what is known - and still not known. In this article, the pharmacology and pharmacokinetics of modafinil and armodafinil are reviewed, along with evidence for their efficacy in treating sleepiness associated with narcolepsy, obstructive sleep apnea and shift work sleep disorder. Clinical trial data for use of alerting agents in the management of JLSAEDS are limited to one three-day trial involving armodafinil, dosed in the morning to treat JLSAEDS in the setting of eastbound transmeridian travel. This study showed improvement in objective measures of daytime sleepiness at doses of 50 and 150 mg per day. However, global impression of clinical severity of symptom scores only improved on day 1 for those patients receiving 150 mg, and were otherwise not superior to placebo. Consideration for the use of modafinil or armodafinil for the treatment of sleepiness associated with JLS involves careful integration of patient-reported goals, a review of medical contraindications, and an awareness of rare adverse events. More research is needed in order to identify those who are most likely to benefit from this intervention and better define the risk-benefit ratio for this indication.

McCleery, J., et al. (2014). "Pharmacotherapies for sleep disturbances in Alzheimer's disease." Cochrane Database Syst Rev(3): Cd009178.
	BACKGROUND: Sleep disturbances, including reduced nocturnal sleep time, sleep fragmentation, nocturnal wandering and daytime sleepiness are common clinical problems in dementia due to Alzheimer's disease (AD), and are associated with significant caregiver distress, increased healthcare costs and institutionalisation. Drug treatment is often sought to alleviate these problems, but there is significant uncertainty about the efficacy and adverse effects of the various hypnotic drugs in this vulnerable population. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects, including common adverse effects, of any drug treatment versus placebo for sleep disorders in people with Alzheimer's disease through identification and analysis of all relevant randomized controlled trials (RCTs). SEARCH METHODS: We searched ALOIS (www.medicine.ox.ac.uk/alois), the Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group's Specialized Register, on 31 March 2013 using the terms: sleep, insomnia, circadian, hypersomnia, parasomnia, somnolence, "rest-activity", sundowning. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs that compared a drug with placebo and that had the primary aim of improving sleep in people with Alzheimer's disease who had an identified sleep disturbance at baseline. Trials could also include non-pharmacological interventions as long as both drug and placebo groups had the same exposure to them. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two authors working independently extracted data on study design, risk of bias and results from the included study reports. Additional information was obtained from study authors where necessary. We used the mean difference as the measure of treatment effect and, where possible, synthesized results using a fixed-effect model. MAIN RESULTS: We found RCTs eligible for inclusion for three drugs: melatonin (209 participants, three studies, but only two yielded data suitable for meta-analysis), trazodone (30 participants, one study) and ramelteon (74 participants, one study, no peer-reviewed publication, very limited information available).The melatonin and trazodone studies were of people with moderate-to-severe AD; the ramelteon study was of people with mild-to-moderate AD. In all studies participants had a variety of common sleep problems. All primary sleep outcomes were measured using actigraphy. In one study of melatonin, drug treatment was combined with morning bright light therapy. Only two studies made a systematic assessment of adverse effects. Overall, the published studies were at low risk of bias, although there were areas of incomplete reporting and some problems with participant attrition, related largely to poor tolerance of actigraphy and technical difficulties. The risk of bias in the ramelteon study was unclear due to incomplete reporting.We found no evidence that melatonin, either immediate- or slow-release, improved any major sleep outcome in patients with AD. We were able to synthesize data for two sleep outcomes: total nocturnal sleep time (MD 10.68 minutes, 95% CI -16.22 to 37.59, two studies), and the ratio of daytime sleep to night-time sleep (MD -0.13, 95% CI -0.29 to 0.03, two studies). Other outcomes were reported in single studies. We found no difference between intervention and control groups for sleep efficiency, time awake after sleep onset or number of night-time awakenings, nor in cognition or performance of activities of daily living (ADLs). No serious adverse effects of melatonin were reported in the included studies.Trazodone 50 mg administered at night for two weeks significantly improved total nocturnal sleep time (MD 42.46 minutes, 95% CI 0.9 to 84.0, one study) and sleep efficiency (MD 8.53, 95% CI 1.9 to 15.1, one study), but there was no clear evidence of any effect on the amount of time spent awake after sleep onset (MD -20.41, 95% CI -60.4 to 19.6, one study) or the number of nocturnal awakenings (MD -3.71, 95% CI -8.2 to 0.8, one study). No effect was seen on daytime sleep, nor on cognition or ADLs. No serious adverse effects were reported.Results from a phase 2 trial investigating ramelteon 8 mg administered at night were available in summary form in a sponsor's synopsis. Ramelteon had no effect on total nocturnal sleep time at one week (primary outcome) or eight weeks (end of treatment). The synopsis reported few significant differences from placebo for any sleep, behavioural or cognitive outcomes; none were likely to be of clinical significance. There were no serious adverse effects of ramelteon. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We discovered a distinct lack of evidence to help guide drug treatment of sleep problems in AD. In particular, we found no RCTs of many drugs that are widely prescribed for sleep problems in AD, including the benzodiazepine and non-benzodiazepine hypnotics, although there is considerable uncertainty about the balance of benefits and risks associated with these common treatments. From the studies we identified for this review, we found no evidence that melatonin is beneficial to AD patients with moderate to severe dementia and sleep problems. There is some evidence to support the use of a low dose (50 mg) of trazodone, although a larger trial is needed to allow a more definitive conclusion to be reached on the balance of risks and benefits. There was no evidence of any effect of ramelteon on sleep in patients with mild to moderate dementia due to AD. This is an area with a high need for pragmatic trials, particularly of those drugs that are in common clinical use for sleep problems in AD. Systematic assessment of adverse effects is essential.

McCleery, J., et al. (2016). "Pharmacotherapies for sleep disturbances in dementia." Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11(11): Cd009178.
	BACKGROUND: Sleep disturbances, including reduced nocturnal sleep time, sleep fragmentation, nocturnal wandering, and daytime sleepiness are common clinical problems in dementia, and are associated with significant caregiver distress, increased healthcare costs, and institutionalisation. Drug treatment is often sought to alleviate these problems, but there is significant uncertainty about the efficacy and adverse effects of the various hypnotic drugs in this vulnerable population. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects, including common adverse effects, of any drug treatment versus placebo for sleep disorders in people with dementia, through identification and analysis of all relevant randomised controlled trials (RCTs). SEARCH METHODS: We searched ALOIS (www.medicine.ox.ac.uk/alois), the Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group's Specialized Register, in March 2013 and again in March 2016, using the terms: sleep, insomnia, circadian, hypersomnia, parasomnia, somnolence, rest-activity, sundowning. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs that compared a drug with placebo, and that had the primary aim of improving sleep in people with dementia who had an identified sleep disturbance at baseline. Trials could also include non-pharmacological interventions, as long as both drug and placebo groups had the same exposure to them. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted data on study design, risk of bias, and results from the included study reports. We obtained additional information from study authors where necessary. We used the mean difference as the measure of treatment effect, and where possible, synthesized results using a fixed-effect model. MAIN RESULTS: We found six RCTs eligible for inclusion for three drugs: melatonin (222 participants, four studies, but only two yielded data on our primary sleep outcomes suitable for meta-analysis), trazodone (30 participants, one study), and ramelteon (74 participants, one study, no peer-reviewed publication, limited information available).The participants in the trazodone study and almost all participants in the melatonin studies had moderate-to-severe dementia due to Alzheimer's disease (AD); those in the ramelteon study had mild-to-moderate AD. Participants had a variety of common sleep problems at baseline. All primary sleep outcomes were measured using actigraphy. In one study of melatonin, drug treatment was combined with morning bright light therapy. Only two studies made a systematic assessment of adverse effects. Overall, the evidence was at low risk of bias, although there were areas of incomplete reporting, some problems with participant attrition, related largely to poor tolerance of actigraphy and technical difficulties, and a high risk of selective reporting in one trial that contributed very few participants. The risk of bias in the ramelteon study was unclear due to incomplete reporting.We found no evidence that melatonin, at doses up to 10 mg, improved any major sleep outcome over 8 to 10 weeks in patients with AD who were identified as having a sleep disturbance. We were able to synthesize data for two of our primary sleep outcomes: total nocturnal sleep time (mean difference (MD) 10.68 minutes, 95% CI -16.22 to 37.59; N = 184; two studies), and the ratio of daytime sleep to night-time sleep (MD -0.13, 95% CI -0.29 to 0.03; N = 184; two studies). From single studies, we found no difference between melatonin and placebo groups for sleep efficiency, time awake after sleep onset, or number of night-time awakenings. From two studies, we found no effect of melatonin on cognition or performance of activities of daily living (ADL). No serious adverse effects of melatonin were reported in the included studies. We considered this evidence to be of low quality.There was low-quality evidence that trazodone 50 mg given at night for two weeks improved total nocturnal sleep time (MD 42.46 minutes, 95% CI 0.9 to 84.0; N = 30; one study), and sleep efficiency (MD 8.53%, 95% CI 1.9 to 15.1; N = 30; one study) in patients with moderate-to-severe AD, but it did not affect the amount of time spent awake after sleep onset (MD -20.41, 95% CI -60.4 to 19.6; N = 30; one study), or the number of nocturnal awakenings (MD -3.71, 95% CI -8.2 to 0.8; N = 30; one study). No effect was seen on daytime sleep, cognition, or ADL. No serious adverse effects of trazodone were reported.Results from a phase 2 trial investigating ramelteon 8 mg administered at night were available in summary form in a sponsor's synopsis. Because the data were from a single, small study and reporting was incomplete, we considered this evidence to be of low quality in general terms. Ramelteon had no effect on total nocturnal sleep time at one week (primary outcome) or eight weeks (end of treatment) in patients with mild-to-moderate AD. The synopsis reported few significant differences from placebo for any sleep, behavioural, or cognitive outcomes; none were likely to be of clinical significance. There were no serious adverse effects from ramelteon. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We discovered a distinct lack of evidence to help guide drug treatment of sleep problems in dementia. In particular, we found no RCTs of many drugs that are widely prescribed for sleep problems in dementia, including the benzodiazepine and non-benzodiazepine hypnotics, although there is considerable uncertainty about the balance of benefits and risks associated with these common treatments. From the studies we identified for this review, we found no evidence that melatonin (up to 10mg) helped sleep problems in patients with moderate to severe dementia due to AD. There was some evidence to support the use of a low dose (50 mg) of trazodone, although a larger trial is needed to allow a more definitive conclusion to be reached on the balance of risks and benefits. There was no evidence of any effect of ramelteon on sleep in patients with mild to moderate dementia due to AD. This is an area with a high need for pragmatic trials, particularly of those drugs that are in common clinical use for sleep problems in dementia. Systematic assessment of adverse effects is essential.

McCleery, J. and A. L. Sharpley (2020). "Pharmacotherapies for sleep disturbances in dementia." Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11(11): Cd009178.
	BACKGROUND: Sleep disturbances, including reduced nocturnal sleep time, sleep fragmentation, nocturnal wandering, and daytime sleepiness are common clinical problems in dementia, and are associated with significant carer distress, increased healthcare costs, and institutionalisation. Although non-drug interventions are recommended as the first-line approach to managing these problems, drug treatment is often sought and used. However, there is significant uncertainty about the efficacy and adverse effects of the various hypnotic drugs in this clinically vulnerable population. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects, including common adverse effects, of any drug treatment versus placebo for sleep disorders in people with dementia. SEARCH METHODS: We searched ALOIS (www.medicine.ox.ac.uk/alois), the Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group's Specialized Register, on 19 February 2020, using the terms: sleep, insomnia, circadian, hypersomnia, parasomnia, somnolence, rest-activity, and sundowning. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) that compared a drug with placebo, and that had the primary aim of improving sleep in people with dementia who had an identified sleep disturbance at baseline. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted data on study design, risk of bias, and results. We used the mean difference (MD) or risk ratio (RR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) as the measures of treatment effect, and where possible, synthesised results using a fixed-effect model. Key outcomes to be included in our summary tables were chosen with the help of a panel of carers. We used GRADE methods to rate the certainty of the evidence. MAIN RESULTS: We found nine eligible RCTs investigating: melatonin (5 studies, n = 222, five studies, but only two yielded data on our primary sleep outcomes suitable for meta-analysis), the sedative antidepressant trazodone (1 study, n = 30), the melatonin-receptor agonist ramelteon (1 study, n = 74, no peer-reviewed publication), and the orexin antagonists suvorexant and lemborexant (2 studies, n = 323). Participants in the trazodone study and most participants in the melatonin studies had moderate-to-severe dementia due to Alzheimer's disease (AD); those in the ramelteon study and the orexin antagonist studies had mild-to-moderate AD. Participants had a variety of common sleep problems at baseline. Primary sleep outcomes were measured using actigraphy or polysomnography. In one study, melatonin treatment was combined with light therapy. Only four studies systematically assessed adverse effects. Overall, we considered the studies to be at low or unclear risk of bias. We found low-certainty evidence that melatonin doses up to 10 mg may have little or no effect on any major sleep outcome over eight to 10 weeks in people with AD and sleep disturbances. We could synthesise data for two of our primary sleep outcomes: total nocturnal sleep time (TNST) (MD 10.68 minutes, 95% CI -16.22 to 37.59; 2 studies, n = 184), and the ratio of day-time to night-time sleep (MD -0.13, 95% CI -0.29 to 0.03; 2 studies; n = 184). From single studies, we found no evidence of an effect of melatonin on sleep efficiency, time awake after sleep onset, number of night-time awakenings, or mean duration of sleep bouts. There were no serious adverse effects of melatonin reported. We found low-certainty evidence that trazodone 50 mg for two weeks may improve TNST (MD 42.46 minutes, 95% CI 0.9 to 84.0; 1 study, n = 30), and sleep efficiency (MD 8.53%, 95% CI 1.9 to 15.1; 1 study, n = 30) in people with moderate-to-severe AD. The effect on time awake after sleep onset was uncertain due to very serious imprecision (MD -20.41 minutes, 95% CI -60.4 to 19.6; 1 study, n = 30). There may be little or no effect on number of night-time awakenings (MD -3.71, 95% CI -8.2 to 0.8; 1 study, n = 30) or time asleep in the day (MD 5.12 minutes, 95% CI -28.2 to 38.4). There were no serious adverse effects of trazodone reported. The small (n = 74), phase 2 trial investigating ramelteon 8 mg was reported only in summary form on the sponsor's website. We considered the certainty of the evidence to be low. There was no evidence of any important effect of ramelteon on any nocturnal sleep outcomes. There were no serious adverse effects. We found moderate-certainty evidence that an orexin antagonist taken for four weeks by people with mild-to-moderate AD probably increases TNST (MD 28.2 minutes, 95% CI 11.1 to 45.3; 1 study, n = 274) and decreases time awake after sleep onset (MD -15.7 minutes, 95% CI -28.1 to -3.3: 1 study, n = 274) but has little or no effect on number of awakenings (MD 0.0, 95% CI -0.5 to 0.5; 1 study, n = 274). It may be associated with a small increase in sleep efficiency (MD 4.26%, 95% CI 1.26 to 7.26; 2 studies, n = 312), has no clear effect on sleep latency (MD -12.1 minutes, 95% CI -25.9 to 1.7; 1 study, n = 274), and may have little or no effect on the mean duration of sleep bouts (MD -2.42 minutes, 95% CI -5.53 to 0.7; 1 study, n = 38). Adverse events were probably no more common among participants taking orexin antagonists than those taking placebo (RR 1.29, 95% CI 0.83 to 1.99; 2 studies, n = 323). AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: We discovered a distinct lack of evidence to guide decisions about drug treatment of sleep problems in dementia. In particular, we found no RCTs of many widely prescribed drugs, including the benzodiazepine and non-benzodiazepine hypnotics, although there is considerable uncertainty about the balance of benefits and risks for these common treatments. We found no evidence for beneficial effects of melatonin (up to 10 mg) or a melatonin receptor agonist. There was evidence of some beneficial effects on sleep outcomes from trazodone and orexin antagonists and no evidence of harmful effects in these small trials, although larger trials in a broader range of participants are needed to allow more definitive conclusions to be reached. Systematic assessment of adverse effects in future trials is essential.

McCune, A. M. and J. D. Lundgren (2015). "Bright light therapy for the treatment of night eating syndrome: A pilot study." Psychiatry Res 229(1-2): 577-579.
	The effect of bright light therapy (BLT) on the symptoms of night eating syndrome was evaluated. Fifteen adults completed two weeks of daily 10,000 lux BLT administered in the morning. Significant reductions were found pre-to-post treatment in night eating symptomatology, mood disturbance, and sleep disturbance. This pilot trial provides preliminary support for the efficacy of BLT for the treatment of night eating syndrome.

McCurry, S. M., et al. (2007). "Evidence-based psychological treatments for insomnia in older adults." Psychol Aging 22(1): 18-27.
	The review describes evidence-based psychological treatments (EBTs) for insomnia in older adults. Following coding procedures developed by the American Psychological Association's Committee on Science and Practice of the Society for Clinical Psychology, two treatments were found to meet EBT criteria: sleep restriction-sleep compression therapy and multicomponent cognitive-behavioral therapy. One additional treatment (stimulus control therapy) partially met criteria, but further corroborating studies are needed. At the present time, there is insufficient evidence to consider other psychological treatments, including cognitive therapy, relaxation, and sleep hygiene education, as stand-alone interventions beneficial for treating insomnia in older adults. Additional research is also needed to examine the efficacy of alternative-complementary therapies, such as bright light therapy, exercise, and massage. This review highlights potential problems with using coding procedures proposed in the EBT coding manual when reviewing the existing insomnia literature. In particular, the classification of older adults as persons age 60 and older and the lack of rigorous consideration of medical comorbidities warrant discussion in the future.

Meesters, Y., et al. (2011). "Low-intensity blue-enriched white light (750 lux) and standard bright light (10,000 lux) are equally effective in treating SAD. A randomized controlled study." BMC Psychiatry 11: 17.
	BACKGROUND: Photoreceptor cells containing melanopsin play a role in the phase-shifting effects of short-wavelength light. In a previous study, we compared the standard light treatment (SLT) of SAD with treatment using short-wavelength blue-enriched white light (BLT). Both treatments used the same illuminance (10,000 lux) and were equally highly effective. It is still possible, however, that neither the newly-discovered photoreceptor cells, nor the biological clock play a major role in the therapeutic effects of light on SAD. Alternatively, these effects may at least be partly mediated by these receptor cells, which may have become saturated as a result of the high illuminances used in the therapy. This randomized controlled study compares the effects of low-intensity BLT to those of high-intensity SLT. METHOD: In a 22-day design, 22 patients suffering from a major depression with a seasonal pattern (SAD) were given light treatment (10,000 lux) for two weeks on workdays. Subjects were randomly assigned to either of the two conditions, with gender and age evenly distributed over the groups. Light treatment either consisted of 30 minutes SLT (5000 °K) with the EnergyLight® (Philips, Consumer Lifestyle) with a vertical illuminance of 10,000 lux at eye position or BLT (17,000 °K) with a vertical illuminance of 750 lux using a prototype of the EnergyLight® which emitted a higher proportion of short-wavelengths. All participants completed questionnaires concerning mood, activation and sleep quality on a daily basis. Mood and energy levels were also assessed on a weekly basis by means of the SIGH-SAD and other assessment tools. RESULTS: On day 22, SIGH-SAD ratings were significantly lower than on day 1 (SLT 65.2% and BLT 76.4%). On the basis of all assessments no statistically significant differences were found between the two conditions. CONCLUSION: With sample size being small, conclusions can only be preliminary. Both treatment conditions were found to be highly effective. The therapeutic effects of low-intensity blue-enriched light were comparable to those of the standard light treatment. Saturation effects may play a role, even with a light intensity of 750 lux. The therapeutic effects of blue-enriched white light in the treatment of SAD at illuminances as low as 750 lux help bring light treatment for SAD within reach of standard workplace and educational lighting systems.

Meesters, Y., et al. (2016). "The effects of low-intensity narrow-band blue-light treatment compared to bright white-light treatment in sub-syndromal seasonal affective disorder." BMC Psychiatry 16: 27.
	BACKGROUND: The discovery of a novel photoreceptor in the retinal ganglion cells with a highest sensitivity of 470-490 nm blue light has led to research on the effects of short-wavelength light in humans. Several studies have explored the efficacy of monochromatic blue or blue-enriched light in the treatment of SAD. In this study, a comparison has been made between the effects of broad-wavelength light without ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths compared to narrow-band blue light in the treatment of sub-syndromal seasonal affective disorder (Sub-SAD). METHOD: In a 15-day design, 48 participants suffering from Sub-SAD completed 20-minute sessions of light treatment on five consecutive days. 22 participants were given bright white-light treatment (BLT, broad-wavelength light without UV 10 000 lux, irradiance 31.7 Watt/m(2)) and 26 participants received narrow-band blue light (BLUE, 100 lux, irradiance 1.0 Watt/m(2)). All participants completed daily and weekly questionnaires concerning mood, activation, sleep quality, sleepiness and energy. Also, mood and energy levels were assessed by means of the SIGH-SAD, the primary outcome measure. RESULTS: On day 15, SIGH-SAD ratings were significantly lower than on day 1 (BLT 54.8 %, effect size 1.7 and BLUE 50.7 %, effect size 1.9). No statistically significant differences were found on the main outcome measures. CONCLUSION: Light treatment is an effective treatment for Sub-SAD. The use of narrow-band blue-light treatment is equally effective as bright white-light treatment. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was registered in the Dutch Trial Register (Nederlands Trial Register TC =  4342 ) (20-12-2013).

Mello, M. T., et al. (2000). "Sleep patterns and sleep-related complaints of Brazilian interstate bus drivers." Braz J Med Biol Res 33(1): 71-77.
	Sleep-related complaints have become a highlight for physicians as well as public health administrators. Studies of sleep patterns and sleep-related complaints of shift workers have been useful in minimizing reduction in the quality of life due to the warping of the sleep-wake cycle. The objective of the present study was to assess patterns of sleep, sleep-related complaints as well as physical activity and scoring rates for depression and anxiety in interstate bus drivers. Data were obtained with a sleep questionnaire, with the Beck inventory for depression, and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI). A total of 400 interstate bus drivers from the northern, southern, central-western and south-eastern regions of Brazil were interviewed. Sixty percent of the subjects interviewed presented at least one sleep-related complaint, 16% admitted to have dozed at the wheel while on duty, and 41% stated that they exercised on a regular basis. Other sleep disturbance complaints reported were: sleep latency 29'17"; physical fatigue, 59.8%; mental fatigue, 45.4%; sleepiness, 25.8%; irritability, 20.6%; insomnia, 37.5%, respiratory disturbances, 19. 25% and snoring, 20.75%. Scores for anxiety and depression were not in the pathological range. The present data reinforce the view that bus drivers are generally discontent with shift work and its effects on sleep. Consequently, it is very important to establish an appropriate work schedule for drivers, besides implementing photo-therapy and physical activities in order to minimize sleepiness when driving.

Melo, F. L., et al. (2018). "What do Cochrane systematic reviews say about interventions for insomnia?" Sao Paulo Med J 136(6): 579-585.
	CONTEXT AND OBJECTIVE: Insomnia is a frequent complaint that generates more than five million visits to doctors per year in the United States. This study summarizes all Cochrane systematic reviews (SRs) that evaluated interventions to treat insomnia. DESIGN AND SETTING: Review of SRs, conducted in the Discipline of Evidence-Based Medicine, Escola Paulista de Medicina (EPM), Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP). METHODS: A sensitive search was carried out in the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews to identify Cochrane SRs that assessed the effects of any type of intervention for people with insomnia. The results, main characteristics of the SRs and the certainty of the evidence obtained from them were synthesized and discussed. RESULTS: Seven SRs were included. They addressed the benefits and harm of acupuncture (n = 1), behavioral interventions (n = 1), music (n = 1), pharmacotherapy (n = 2), phototherapy (n = 1) and physical exercise (n = 1). The certainty of the evidence ranged from moderate to very low. CONCLUSION: Acupuncture, music, physical exercise, paroxetine, doxepin, trimipramine and trazodone seem to present some benefit for patients with insomnia. However, the uncertainty around these results means that no robust and definitive recommendations for clinical practice can be made until the benefits and harms from each intervention for patients with insomnia have been confirmed through further studies.

Meyerhoff, J., et al. (2018). "Patterns of depressive symptom remission during the treatment of seasonal affective disorder with cognitive-behavioral therapy or light therapy." Depress Anxiety 35(5): 457-467.
	BACKGROUND: To elucidate mechanisms related to remission in winter seasonal affective disorder (SAD), we explored the course of individual depressive symptom offset across two distinct treatment modalities that show comparable outcomes at treatment endpoint: cognitive-behavioral therapy for SAD (CBT-SAD) and light therapy (LT). METHOD: One hundred seventy-seven adults with SAD in a depressive episode were randomized to 6-weeks of CBT-SAD (n = 88) or LT (n = 89). Symptoms were assessed via the 29-item Structured Interview Guide for the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression-SAD Version (SIGH-SAD) at pretreatment and weekly during treatment. Survival analyses were conducted for the 17 SIGH-SAD items endorsed by more than 40 participants at pretreatment. Within each of the included symptoms, data from participants who endorsed the symptom at pretreatment and who had 3 or fewer weeks missing were included. RESULTS: For most (13/17; 76%) symptoms, CBT-SAD and LT did not differ in time to remission. However, for four symptoms (early insomnia, psychic anxiety, hypersomnia, and social withdrawal), LT led to symptom remission more quickly than CBT-SAD. CONCLUSIONS: Symptom remission progressed comparably across CBT-SAD and LT for most symptoms. Despite the fact that the two treatments led to similar remission rates and improvements at treatment endpoint, for early insomnia, psychic anxiety, hypersomnia, and social withdrawal, LT led to symptom remission faster than CBT-SAD. These results suggest different mechanisms and pathways to the same therapeutic end. Speedier remission of early insomnia and hypersomnia is consistent with the theory that SAD is related to a pathological circadian phase-shift that can be corrected with LT.

Micic, G., et al. (2013). "The endogenous circadian temperature period length (tau) in delayed sleep phase disorder compared to good sleepers." J Sleep Res 22(6): 617-624.
	The currently assumed aetiology for delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD) is a delay of the circadian system. Clinicians have sought to use bright light therapy, exogenous melatonin or chronotherapy to correct the disorder. However, these treatments have achieved unreliable outcomes for DSPD patients and, as such, one suggestion has been that the disorder may be caused by a longer than normal circadian rhythm period length (i.e. tau). The present study investigated this premise using a 78-h ultradian, ultra-short sleep-wake cycle. This constant bedrest routine was used to simulate a series of 1-h long 'days' by alternating 20-min sleep opportunities and 40 min of enforced wakefulness. Thirteen participants were recruited for the study including, six people diagnosed with DSPD according to the International Classification of Sleep Disorders-2 [mean age = 22.0, standard deviation (SD) = 3.3] and seven good sleepers (mean age = 23.1, SD = 3.9) with normal sleep timing. The DSPD participants' core temperature rhythm tau (mean = 24 h 54 min, SD = 23 min) was significantly longer (t = -2.33, P = 0.04, Cohen's d = 1.91) than the good sleepers' (mean 24 h 29 min, SD = 16 min). The temperature rhythm of the DSPD participants delayed more rapidly (i.e. >25 min day(-1) ) than the good sleepers'. These findings provide an explanation for the difficulty that DSPD patients have in phase advancing to a more conventional sleep time and their frequent relapse following treatment. The outcomes of this study support a vigorous and continued application of chronobiological and behavioural therapies to entrain DSPD patients to their desired earlier sleep times.

Micic, G., et al. (2015). "Nocturnal Melatonin Profiles in Patients with Delayed Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder and Control Sleepers." J Biol Rhythms 30(5): 437-448.
	A significant delay in the timing of endogenous circadian rhythms has been associated with delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD). More recently, other mechanisms have also been proposed to account for this disorder. To further explore the etiology of DSPD, the present study compared nocturnal melatonin profiles of 26 DSPD patients (18 males, 8 females; age, 21.73 ± 4.98 years) and 17 normally timed good sleepers (10 males, 7 females; age, 23.82 ± 5.23 years) in a time-free, dim-light (<10 lux) laboratory environment. A 30-h modified constant routine with alternating 20-min sleep opportunities and 40 min of enforced wakefulness was used to measure the endogenous melatonin circadian rhythm. Salivary melatonin was sampled half-hourly from 1820 h to 0020 h and then hourly from 0120 h to 1620 h. DSPD patients had significantly later timed melatonin profiles that were delayed by approximately 3 h compared to normal sleepers, and there were no notable differences in the relative duration of secretion between groups. However, melatonin secretion between dim-light melatonin onset (DLMO) and acrophase was less prominent in DSPD patients compared to good sleepers, who showed a more acute initial surge of melatonin following the DLMO. Although the regulatory role of melatonin is unknown, abnormal melatonin profiles have been linked to psychiatric and neurological disorders (e.g., major depression, obsessive compulsive disorder, Parkinson disease). These results therefore suggest that in addition to a delayed endogenous circadian rhythm, a diminished initial surge of melatonin secretion following DLMO may contribute to the etiology of DSPD.

Micic, G., et al. (2016). "The etiology of delayed sleep phase disorder." Sleep Med Rev 27: 29-38.
	According to classification manuals for sleep disorders, nine disorders are directly related to biological clock timing misalignments. Of all, delayed sleep phase disorder (DSPD) is the most commonly diagnosed, predominantly affecting adolescents, young adults, and insomnia patients. It is a persistent inability to fall asleep at earlier, more desirable and socially conventional times, coupled with extreme difficulty awakening in the morning. Considerable evidence shows a delay in the circadian clock to be associated with DSPD. Therefore, treatments have mainly focused on advancing the biological clock and sleep timing through pharmacotherapy, phototherapy and behavioral therapies. The clinical evidence indicates that these treatments are efficacious, at least in the short term. However, follow up studies show frequent patient relapse, leading researchers to speculate that alternative etiologies may be contributing to sleep and circadian clock delays in DSPD. The aim of the present paper is to review and collate current literature related to DSPD etiology in order to outline gaps in current knowledge and suggest future research.

Mishima, K. (2013). "[Circadian rhythm sleep disorder]." Nihon Rinsho 71(12): 2103-2108.
	Primary pathophysiology of circadian rhythm sleep disorders(CRSDs) is a misalignment between the endogenous circadian rhythm phase and the desired or socially required sleep-wake schedule, or dysfunction of the circadian pacemaker and its afferent/efferent pathways. CRSDs consist of delayed sleep phase type, advanced sleep phase type, free-running type, irregular sleep-wake type, shift work type and jet lag type. Chronotherapy using strong zeitgebers (time cues), such as bright light and melatonin/ melatonin type 2 receptor agonist, is effective when administered with proper timing. Bright light is the strongest entraining agent of circadian rhythms. Bright light therapy (appropriately-timed exposure to bright light) for CRSDs is an effective treatment option, and can shift the sleep-wake cycle to earlier or later times, in order to correct for misalignment between the circadian system and the desired sleep-wake schedule. Timed administration of melatonin, either alone or in combination with light therapy has also been shown to be useful in the treatment of CRSDs.

Miura, J., et al. (2018). "Effects of Bright Light with Reduced Blue Light on Sleepiness on Rising: A Small Exploratory Study." Sleep Disord 2018: 2378630.
	Bright light therapy is a treatment modality for seasonal affective disorder and circadian rhythm disorders in which artificial light of 2,500 lux or higher at the eye is effective. Although short-wavelength visible light is more effective than long-wavelength visible light, it may be hazardous to the retina. Recently, light-emitting diodes (LEDs) have been used as the light source in bright light therapy apparatuses. We developed goggles for bright light therapy equipped with LEDs as the light source. The aim of this study was to examine the efficacy and safety of our goggles when emitting 10,000-lux light with its short-wavelength light content reduced by 30% or 50% (denoted as 30%-cut and 50%-cut light, respectively, henceforth). Six healthy young males participated in this study. They were administered no light, 50%-cut light, and 30%-cut light for 30 min early in the morning for 4 days each. Subjective sleepiness and sleep quality were evaluated by the Stanford Sleepiness Scale (SSS) and the Oguri-Shirakawa-Azumi sleep inventory MA version (OSA-MA), respectively. Subjective sleepiness evaluated by the SSS and the subscale of the OSA-MA significantly decreased with 30%-cut light compared with no light. Psychomotor performance evaluated by a calculation task improved with the 30%-cut light, although not significant after multiple comparisons were considered. No abnormality was found by ophthalmoscopy and the vision test. In conclusion, our goggles with 30%-cut light may be safe and have an awakening effect.

Moderie, C., et al. (2022). "[Sleep disorders in patients with a neurocognitive disorder]." Encephale 48(3): 325-334.
	INTRODUCTION: Sleep disorders are prevalent in patients with a neurocognitive disorder, and diagnosis and treatment in these patients remain challenging in clinical practice. METHODS: This narrative review offers a systematic approach to diagnose and treat sleep disorders in neurocognitive disorders. RESULTS: Alzheimer's disease is often associated with circadian rhythm disorders, chronic insomnia, and sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome. Alpha-synucleinopathies (e.g., Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia) are often associated with a rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, restless legs syndrome, chronic insomnia, and sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome. A focused history allows to diagnose most sleep disorders. Clinicians should ensure to gather the following information in all patients with a neurocognitive disorder: (1) the presence of difficulties falling asleep or staying asleep, (2) the impact of sleep disturbances on daily functioning (fatigue, sleepiness and other daytime consequences), and (3) abnormal movements in sleep. Sleep diaries and questionnaires can assist clinicians in screening for specific sleep disorders. Polysomnography is recommended if a rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder or a sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome are suspected. Sleep complaints should prompt clinicians to ensure that comorbidities interfering with sleep are properly managed. The main treatment for moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome remains continuous positive airway pressure, as its efficacy has been demonstrated in patients with neurocognitive disorders. Medications should also be reviewed, and time of administration should be optimized (diuretics and stimulating medications in the morning, sedating medications in the evening). Importantly, cholinesterase inhibitors (especially donepezil) may trigger insomnia. Switching to morning dosing or to an alternative drug may help. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia is indicated to treat chronic insomnia in neurocognitive disorders. False beliefs regarding sleep should be addressed with the patient and their caregiver. The sleep environment should be optimized (decrease light exposure at night, minimize noise, avoid taking vital signs, etc.). Sleep restriction can be considered as patients with a neurocognitive disorder often spend too much time in bed. The need for naps should be assessed case by case as naps may contribute to insomnia in some patients but allow others to complete their diurnal activities. Trazodone (50mg) may also be used under certain circumstances in chronic insomnia. Recent evidence does not support a role for exogenous melatonin in patients with a neucognitive disorder and insomnia. Patients in long-term care facilities are often deprived of an adequate diurnal exposure to light. Increasing daytime exposure to light may improve sleep and mood. Patients with circadian rhythm disorders can also benefit from light therapy (morning bright light therapy in case of phase delay and evening bright light therapy in case of phase advance). Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder can lead to violent behaviors, and the sleeping environment should be secured (e.g., mattress on the floor, remove surrounding objects). Medication exacerbating this disorder should be stopped if possible. High dose melatonin (6 to 18mg) or low dose clonazepam (0.125-0.25mg) at bedtime may be used to reduce symptoms. Melatonin is preferred in first-line as it is generally well tolerated with few side effects. Patients with restless legs syndrome should be investigated for iron deficiency. Medication decreasing dopaminergic activity should be reduced or stopped if possible. Behavioral strategies such as exercise and leg massages may be beneficial. Low-dose dopamine agonists (such as pramipexole 0.125mg two hours before bedtime) can be used to treat the condition, but a prolonged treatment may paradoxically worsen the symptoms. Alpha-2-delta calcium channel ligands can also be used while monitoring for the risk of falls. CONCLUSION: Multiple and sustained nonpharmacological approaches are recommended for the treatment of sleep disturbances in patients with neurocognitive disorder. Pharmacological indications remain limited, and further randomized clinical trials integrating a multimodal approach are warranted to evaluate the treatment of sleep disorders in specific neurocognitive disorders.

Moller, H. J., et al. (2004). "Psychiatric aspects of late-life insomnia." Sleep Med Rev 8(1): 31-45.
	Epidemiological trends towards a 'graying' population make the issue of insomnia in the elderly an increasingly important research and clinical topic. It is often challenging to determine how much of a psychiatric dimension there is to a clinical condition that is best viewed as both as a symptom and a true psychosomatic entity in its own right. To categorize insomnia as either psychiatric or medically based risks oversimplification of the complexities of sleep disruption in the elderly. Normal senescence-related changes in sleep architecture and circadian rhythms must be considered, as well as the frequent medical comorbidities that may affect sleep. Psychiatric diagnoses to consider include mood and anxiety disorders, which may be affected equally by physiological and psychological changes implicit in old age. Sleep disruption related to dementia is of particular interest to clinicians involved with patients in long-term care facilities. Insomnia may occasionally be iatrogenically induced or exacerbated, and particularly antidepressants must be carefully selected for this reason. Light therapy and behavior therapies are important in multimodal treatment of insomnia, and sleep hygiene includes both regular physical and social activities to preserve entrainment of circadian rhythms affecting sleep.

Montgomery, P. and J. Dennis (2002). "Bright light therapy for sleep problems in adults aged 60+." Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002(2): Cd003403.
	BACKGROUND: The prevalence of sleep problems in adulthood increases with age. While not all sleep changes are pathological in later life, severe disturbances may lead to depression, cognitive impairments, deterioration of quality of life, significant stresses for carers and increased healthcare costs. The most common treatment for sleep disorders (particularly insomnia) is pharmacological. The efficacy of non-drug interventions has been suggested to be slower than pharmacological methods, but with no risk of drug-related tolerance or dependency. Bright light treatment involves participants sitting in front of a "light box" which emits very high (typically 10,000 lux) fluorescent light for periods of around two hours daily. The timing of this light treatment will depend on the irregular timing of the participant's sleep pattern. OBJECTIVES: To assess the efficacy of bright light therapy in improving sleep quality (sleep timing in particular) amongst adults aged 60 and above. SEARCH STRATEGY: The following databases were searched: MEDLINE (1966 - January 2001); EMBASE (1980 - January 2001), CINAHL ( 1982 - January 2001; PsychINFO 1970 to 2001; The Cochrane Library (Issue 1, 2001); National Research Register (NRR [2001]). Bibliographies of existing reviews in the area, as well as of all trial reports obtained, were searched. Experts in the field were consulted. SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials of bright light therapy for primary sleep problems where 80% or more of participants were over 60. Participants must have been screened to exclude those with dementia and/or depression. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Abstracts of studies identified in searches of electronic databases were read and assessed to determine whether they might meet the inclusion criteria. MAIN RESULTS: Reviewers found no trials on which to base conclusions for the effectiveness of this treatment. REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: When the possible side-effects of standard treatment (hypnotics) are considered, there is a reasonable argument to be made for clinical use of non-pharmacological treatments. In view of the promising results of bright light therapy in other populations with problems of sleep timing, further research into their effectiveness with older adults would seem justifiable.

Montgomery, P. and J. Dennis (2004). "A systematic review of non-pharmacological therapies for sleep problems in later life." Sleep Med Rev 8(1): 47-62.
	Sleep problems become more common with age, affect quality of life for individuals and their families, and can increase healthcare costs. Older people are often prescribed a range of drugs for their health problems, many of which have side effects. Side effects are just one reason why there is an argument to be made for clinical use of non-pharmacological treatments. This review considers the effectiveness of three interventions, cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), bright light, and physical exercise. It considers sleep quality, duration and efficiency as primary outcome measures. Randomised controlled trials were selected where 80% or more of participants were over 60 and had a diagnosis of primary insomnia and where investigators had taken care to screen participants for dementia and/or depression. The data suggest a mild effect of CBT for sleep problems in older adults, best demonstrated for sleep maintenance insomnia. It may be that the provisions of 'top-up' or 'refresher' sessions of CBT training to improve durability of effect are worthy of investigation. Evidence of the efficacy of bright light and exercise were so limited that no conclusions about them can be reached as yet; however, in view of the promising results of bright light therapy in other populations with problems of sleep timing, further research into its effectiveness with older adults would seem justifiable. Exercise, though not appropriate for all in this population, may enhance sleep. Research involving exercise programmes designed with the elderly in mind is needed.

Morries, L. D., et al. (2015). "Treatments for traumatic brain injury with emphasis on transcranial near-infrared laser phototherapy." Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 11: 2159-2175.
	Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a growing health concern affecting civilians and military personnel. In this review, treatments for the chronic TBI patient are discussed, including pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals, cognitive therapy, and hyperbaric oxygen therapy. All available literature suggests a marginal benefit with prolonged treatment courses. An emerging modality of treatment is near-infrared (NIR) light, which has benefit in animal models of stroke, spinal cord injury, optic nerve injury, and TBI, and in human trials for stroke and TBI. The extant literature is confounded by variable degrees of efficacy and a bewildering array of treatment parameters. Some data indicate that diodes emitting low-level NIR energy often have failed to demonstrate therapeutic efficacy, perhaps due to failing to deliver sufficient radiant energy to the necessary depth. As part of this review, we present a retrospective case series using high-power NIR laser phototherapy with a Class IV laser to treat TBI. We demonstrate greater clinical efficacy with higher fluence, in contrast to the bimodal model of efficacy previously proposed. In ten patients with chronic TBI (average time since injury 9.3 years) given ten treatments over the course of 2 months using a high-power NIR laser (13.2 W/0.89 cm(2) at 810 nm or 9 W/0.89 cm(2) at 810 nm and 980 nm), symptoms of headache, sleep disturbance, cognition, mood dysregulation, anxiety, and irritability improved. Symptoms were monitored by depression scales and a novel patient diary system specifically designed for this study. NIR light in the power range of 10-15 W at 810 nm and 980 nm can safely and effectively treat chronic symptoms of TBI. The clinical benefit and effects of infrared phototherapy on mitochondrial function and secondary molecular events are discussed in the context of adequate radiant energy penetration.

Moscovitch, A., et al. (2004). "A placebo-controlled study of sertraline in the treatment of outpatients with seasonal affective disorder." Psychopharmacology (Berl) 171(4): 390-397.
	RATIONALE: Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a relatively common cyclical depressive illness characterized by seasonal depressions during winter. The disorder is commonly responsive to light therapy, but antidepressant drug efficacy has not been definitely established. Serotonin selective re-uptake inhibitors are potentially efficacious treatments for SAD. OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy, tolerability and safety of sertraline treatment for SAD. METHODS: One hundred and eighty seven outpatients with seasonal pattern recurrent winter depression (DSM-III-R defined) and a minimum 29-item Hamilton depression scale (SIGH-SAD version) score of 22 were randomized to 8 weeks treatment with either sertraline or placebo in a double-blind, multi-country, multi-center, parallel-group, flexible dose (50-200 mg once daily) study. Efficacy was investigated using physician and patient-rated scales measuring depression, anxiety and symptoms characteristic of seasonal affective disorder. RESULTS: Sertraline produced a significantly greater response than placebo at endpoint as measured by changes in the 29-item and 21-item Hamilton depression scales, the clinical global impression (CGI) severity scale, the Hamilton anxiety scale, and the hospital anxiety and depression scale. The proportion of sertraline-treated subjects achieving a response on the CGI improvement rating (ratings of 1 or 2) at endpoint (last observation carried forward) was significantly greater than that of the placebo group. Overall sertraline was well tolerated with the most frequent placebo adjusted adverse events, being nausea, diarrhea, insomnia and dry mouth. Adverse events were mostly mild to moderate and transient. CONCLUSIONS: Sertraline pharmacotherapy has been demonstrated to be an effective and well-tolerated therapy for out patients with SAD. As such, sertraline offers an important pharmacological option in the clinical management of this condition.

Mueed, Z., et al. (2021). "Decoding the Inter-Relationship between Sleep Disorders and Alzheimer's Disease Pathogenesis." CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 20(8): 723-735.
	Alzheimer's Disease (AD), characterized by abnormally phosphorylated tau, Paired Helical Filaments (PHFs), Neurofibrillary Tangles (NFTs), deregulated mammalian Target Of Rapamycin (mTOR), and Aβ deposits, is a multifactorial disease with sleep disorders being one of the causative agents. Therefore, we have reviewed the literature and have tried to decode the existence of positive feedback, reciprocal and a bidirectional relationship allying between sleep disturbances and AD. Much light has been thrown on the role of tau pathology and amyloid pathology in sleep pathology and its association with AD pathology. We have also discussed the role of melatonin in regulating sleep disorders and AD. The neuroprotective effect of melatonin via inhibiting tau hyperphosphorylation and Aβ deposition has also been discussed. Moreover, astrocytes involvement in aggravating AD has also been highlighted in this review. Several therapeutic approaches aimed at improving both sleep disorders and AD have been duly discussed such as administration of antidepressants and antihistamines, immunotherapy, metal chelators, melatonin supplementation, light therapy and physical activity. Despite consistent efforts, the complete etiology concerning sleep disorder and AD is still unclear. Therefore, further research is needed to unravel the mechanism involved and also to develop strategies that may help in obstructing AD in its preclinical stage.

Müller, M. J., et al. (1997). "Side effects of adjunct light therapy in patients with major depression." Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 247(5): 252-258.
	Adjunct bright-light therapy has been suggested to augment antidepressant drug treatment in patients with non-seasonal major depression. Side effects of the combined therapy have not been investigated thus far. Therefore, somatic complaints and side effects of combined therapy were evaluated in 28 patients with major depression (DSM-III-R) randomly assigned to either trimipramine or trimipramine and serially applied adjunct bright-light therapy. Response rates were comparable in both treatment groups and rates of newly emergent side effects during treatment were generally low. The most prominent unfavourable side effects of adjunct bright-light therapy as compared with trimipramine monotherapy were aggravated sedation, persisting restlessness, emerging sleep disturbance and decreased appetite as well as the worsening of vertigo. Discriminant analysis revealed that the combination of trimipramine with bright light results in a different side effect profile compared with drug monotherapy.

Münch, M. and V. Bromundt (2012). "Light and chronobiology: implications for health and disease." Dialogues Clin Neurosci 14(4): 448-453.
	Environmental light synchronizes the primary mammalian biological clock in the suprachiasmatic nuclei, as well as many peripheral clocks in tissues and cells, to the solar 24-hour day. Light is the strongest synchronizing agent (zeitgeber) for the circadian system, and therefore keeps most biological and psychological rhythms internally synchronized, which is important for optimum function. Circadian sleep-wake disruptions and chronic circadian misalignment, as often observed in psychiatric and neurodegenerative illness, can be treated with light therapy. The beneficial effect on circadian synchronization, sleep quality, mood, and cognitive performance depends on timing, intensity, and spectral composition of light exposure. Tailoring and optimizing indoor lighting conditions may be an approach to improve wellbeing, alertness, and cognitive performance and, in the long term, producing health benefits.

Murphy, P. J. and S. S. Campbell (1996). "Enhanced performance in elderly subjects following bright light treatment of sleep maintenance insomnia." J Sleep Res 5(3): 165-172.
	Sixteen older individuals with sleep maintenance insomnia were treated with night-time bright-light exposure (BL) while living at home. Twelve consecutive days of acute light treatment were followed by a 3-mo maintenance light-treatment period. Subjects completed laboratory evaluation sessions on five separate occasions (prior to and following the acute light-treatment period, and once per month during the maintenance period). During each laboratory session, performance levels, sleep, and core body temperature were measured. The performance battery consisted of four computerized tasks (Logical Reasoning, Stroop Congruency, Two Letter Visual Search, and Wilkinson Four-Choice Reaction Time) and was administered every 2 h between 10.00 and 18.00 hours. Subjects improved significantly on three of the four tasks from pre-BL to post-BL. During the maintenance period, subjects who received active BL treatment maintained significantly higher performance levels than a control BL group. Light treatment improved sleep efficiency and delayed the phase of the body temperature rhythm. Performance improvements were significantly related only to sleep and not to circadian phase. The implications for non-circadian treatments of sleep maintenance insomnia and cognitive functioning in the elderly are discussed.

Natale, P., et al. (2019). "Interventions for improving sleep quality in people with chronic kidney disease." Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5(5): Cd012625.
	BACKGROUND: Sleep disorders are commonly experienced by people with chronic kidney disease (CKD). Several approaches for improving sleep quality are used in clinical practice including relaxation techniques, exercise, acupressure, and medication. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effectiveness and associated adverse events of interventions designed to improve sleep quality among adults and children with CKD including people with end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) treated with dialysis or kidney transplantation. SEARCH METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Kidney and Transplant Register of Studies up to 8 October 2018 with the Information Specialist using search terms relevant to this review. Studies in the Register are identified through searches of CENTRAL, MEDLINE, and EMBASE, conference proceedings, the International Clinical Trials Register (ICTRP) Search Portal and ClinicalTrials.gov. SELECTION CRITERIA: We included randomised controlled trials (RCTs) or quasi-randomised RCTs of any intervention in which investigators reported effects on sleep quality. Two authors independently screened titles and abstracts of identified records. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two review authors independently extracted data and assessed the risk of bias for included studies. The primary outcomes were sleep quality, sleep onset latency, sleep duration, sleep interruption, and sleep efficiency. Risks of bias were assessed using the Cochrane tool. Evidence certainty was assessed using the GRADE approach. We calculated treatment estimates as risk ratios (RR) for dichotomous outcomes or mean difference (MD) or standardised MD (SMD) for continuous outcomes to account for heterogeneity in measures of sleep quality. MAIN RESULTS: Sixty-seven studies involving 3427 participants met the eligibility criteria. Thirty-six studies involving 2239 participants were included in meta-analyses. Follow-up for clinical outcomes ranged between 0.3 and 52.8 weeks (median 5 weeks). Interventions included relaxation techniques, exercise, acupressure, cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT), educational interventions, benzodiazepine treatment, dopaminergic agonists, telephone support, melatonin, reflexology, light therapy, different forms of peritoneal dialysis, music, aromatherapy, and massage. Incomplete reporting of key methodological details resulted in uncertain risk of bias in many studies.In very low certainty evidence relaxation techniques had uncertain effects on sleep quality and duration, health-related quality of life (HRQoL), depression, anxiety, and fatigue. Studies were not designed to evaluate the effects of relaxation on sleep latency or hospitalisation. Exercise had uncertain effects on sleep quality (SMD -1.10, 95% CI -2.26 to 0.05; I(2) = 90%; 5 studies, 165 participants; very low certainty evidence). Exercise probably decreased depression (MD -9.05, 95% CI -13.72 to -4.39; I(2) = 0%; 2 studies, 46 participants; moderate certainty evidence) and fatigue (SMD -0.68, 95% CI -1.07 to -0.29; I(2) = 0%; 2 studies, 107 participants; moderate certainty evidence). Compared with no acupressure, acupressure had uncertain effects on sleep quality (Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) scale 0 - 21) (MD -1.27, 95% CI -2.13 to -0.40; I(2) = 89%; 6 studies, 367 participants: very low certainty evidence). Acupressure probably slightly improved sleep latency (scale 0 - 3) (MD -0.59, 95% CI -0.92 to -0.27; I(2) = 0%; 3 studies, 173 participants; moderate certainty evidence) and sleep time (scale 0 - 3) (MD -0.60, 95% CI -1.12 to -0.09; I(2) = 68%; 3 studies, 173 participants; moderate certainty evidence), although effects on sleep disturbance were uncertain as the evidence certainty was very low (scale 0 - 3) (MD -0.49, 95% CI -1.16 to 0.19; I(2) = 97%). In moderate certainty evidence, acupressure probably decrease fatigue (MD -1.07, 95% CI -1.67 to -0.48; I(2) = 0%; 2 studies, 137 participants). Acupressure had uncertain effects on depression (MD -3.65, 95% CI -7.63 to 0.33; I(2) = 27%; 2 studies, 137 participants; very low certainty evidence) while studies were not designed to evaluate the effect of acupressure on HRQoL, anxiety, or hospitalisation. It was uncertain whether acupressure compared with sham acupressure improved sleep quality (PSQI scale 0 to 21) because the certainty of the evidence was very low (MD -2.25, 95% CI -6.33 to 1.82; I(2) = 96%; 2 studies, 129 participants), but total sleep time may have been improved (SMD -0.34, 95% CI -0.73 to 0.04; I(2) = 0%; 2 studies, 107 participants; low certainty evidence). (2) =(2) =There were no studies designed to directly examine and/or correlate efficacy of any interventions aimed at improving sleep that may have been attempted for the spectrum of sleep disordered breathing. No studies reported treatment effects for children. Adverse effects of therapies were very uncertain. AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: The evidence base for improving sleep quality and related outcomes for adults and children with CKD is sparse. Relaxation techniques and exercise had uncertain effects on sleep outcomes. Acupressure may improve sleep latency and duration, although these findings are based on few studies. The effects of acupressure were not confirmed in studies in which sham acupressure was used as the control. Given the very low certainly evidence, future research will very likely change the evidence base. Based on the importance of symptom management to patients, caregivers and clinicians, future studies of sleep interventions among people with CKD should be a priority.

Neylan, T. C. (1995). "Treatment of sleep disturbances in depressed patients." J Clin Psychiatry 56 Suppl 2: 56-61.
	Sleep is disturbed in 90% of patients with major depression. Disordered sleep physiology may persist after clinical remission of depression, suggesting either that sleep disruption is a trait characteristic of recurrent depression or that depressed patients acquire new habits that perpetuate sleep-related problems. This article reviews the data suggesting a common pathophysiology between sleep and depression. It then focuses on a strategy for evaluating and treating sleep disruption in depressed patients. Treatment must have a conservative goal of restoring sleep quality to the pre-episode level. The treatment of sleep disruption relies primarily on optimal treatment of the depression itself. This includes evaluation and treatment of comorbid medical disorders, substance use (e.g., caffeine, alcohol), and sleep disorders (e.g., nocturnal myoclonus, sleep apnea). The effects of the different classes of antidepressant medications on sleep architecture are presented. Nonpharmacologic strategies for improving sleep, such as behavior modification, relaxation, and phototherapy, are discussed. Finally, the risks and benefits of hypnotic use in the depressed patient and a treatment algorithm for the acute and chronic use of hypnotics are considered.

O'Caoimh, R., et al. (2019). "Non-pharmacological treatments for sleep disturbance in mild cognitive impairment and dementia: A systematic review and meta-analysis." Maturitas 127: 82-94.
	No disease-modifying treatments for dementia are available. Sleep disturbance is strongly associated with cognitive impairment. Non-pharmacological treatments targeting sleep may offer an alternative therapeutic approach. We searched PubMed, CINAHL, EMBASE and the Cochrane library for non-pharmacological treatments for sleep disturbance in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia, published in English from October 1965 to 2018, including all designs, excluding studies of drug therapies. In all, 53 papers representing 48 studies were included. Participant age ranged from 67.3 to 89.4 years. Most studies (79%) had small samples (<50 participants, range 1-173) and were conducted in long-term/residential care (62%). The majority (85%) recruited participants with moderate-severe dementia; mean MMSE scores ranged from 0 to 28.3/30. Four studies examined MCI. Light therapy delivered over 1-10 weeks was the most studied stand-alone intervention (n = 27), and the majority (81.5%) of these studies found improvements on objective or subjective sleep measures, though the evidence was inconclusive with significant clinical and methodological heterogeneity. Seven multi-modal intervention studies were identified, all incorporating light exposure, and six of these reported improved sleep. Other interventions included electrotherapy stimulation (n = 4), physical exercises/activities (n = 4), acupressure/acupuncture (n = 3) and mindfulness/cognitive behavioural therapy (n = 3). Those examining MCI utilised different mono-modal approaches. A meta-analysis of data from randomised controlled trials showed a statistically significant (mean difference = 3.44, 95% CI: 0.89-5.99, I(2)=0%; p = 0.008) improvement in sleep efficiency between interventions and controls, favouring the pooled interventions (bright light, multi-domain and other therapies). No other significant differences in sleep or non-sleep outcomes were found. While evidence is available for non-pharmacological sleep interventions, particularly multi-domain approaches, studies were diverse and had small samples. More research examining multi-modal interventions, community-dwellers and those with MCI is required.

Oka, Y. (2014). "[Sleep problems in dementia]." Rinsho Shinkeigaku 54(12): 994-996.
	Sleep disturbance is common in patients with dementia. Circadian rhythm sleep disorders are caused by the disturbance of sleep-wake regulation in the central nervous system, disturbed input into the sensory organs, and decreased social activities. Diurnal change of serum melatonin level in Alzheimer's disease showed decreased amplitude and shifted peak secretion. Age related sleep disturbances and sleep disorders due to the neurodegeneration including REM sleep behavior disorder also increase in dementia. Identifying and treating underlying sleep disorders along with therapeutic approach to circadian mechanism is effective. Treatment of circadian abnormality in dementia require light therapy and increased daytime activity. Use of oral melatonin is also effective for the improvement of nocturnal sleep. Treatment of sleep problems in dementia also contribute to the better management of dementia.

Ondzé, B., et al. (2001). "[Advanced sleep phase syndrome]." Rev Neurol (Paris) 157(11 Pt 2): S130-134.
	The Advanced Sleep Phase Syndrome (ASPS) is a sleep disorder characterized by an early sleep onset and early awakening without any disturbance of the sleep structure. The management of this disease requires clinical and laboratory investigations in an attempt to confirm the phase advance of body core temperature and melatonin rhythm. The use of light therapy, possibly associated with chronotherapy or melatonin intake has been proposed. The evolution is variable. Seven subjects, aged 15 to 72 were diagnosed in our sleep disorders unit by mean of sleep log, actigraphy, sleep and temperature recording. The sleep onset and sleep offset times were approximately the same according to sleep log, actigraphy and night polysomnography. The nadir of body core temperature was at 01:38 +/- 01:03. Two familial cases were identified of which 1 was investigated in constant routine condition with hourly blood sampling. An advanced phase of melatonin and cortisol was evidenced. The disease temporarily improved in 3 cases with light therapy and in one case with the association of light therapy and chronotherapy. These data show the difficulties of the management and the treatment of this rarely diagnosed disease.

Onen, F. and S. H. Onen (2003). "[Sleep rhythm disturbances in Alzheimer's disease]." Rev Med Interne 24(3): 165-171.
	PURPOSE: Sleep-wake rhythm disturbances observed in Alzheimer's disease are correlated with the severity of cognitive impairment and often result in institutionalization. These disturbances are also a major cause of psychotropic medication misuse. We report age-related physiologic and disease related pathologic changes in sleep-wake rhythms and propose chronobiological treatment approaches in patients with Alzheimer's disease. CURRENT KNOWLEDGE AND KEY POINT: Alzheimer patients show a greater breakdown of the circadian sleep-wake cycle compared to similarly aged non demented controls. Demented patients spend their nights in a state of frequent restlessness and their days in a state of frequent sleepiness. These sleep-wake disturbances became increasingly more marked with progression of the disease. The architecture of sleep in Alzheimer's disease is marked by further decreases of slow wave sleep (SWS) and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, and increases of time and frequency of awakening compared to age-matched control subjects. The sleep-wake disturbances in elderly people and particularly Alzheimer patients may result from changes at different levels: a reduction of environmental synchronizers or their perception, a lack of mental and physical activity, an age or disease related anatomical changes with loss of functionality of the biological clock(s). FUTURE PROSPECTS AND PROJECTS: In Alzheimer patients, controlling sleep-wake disturbances with sedative drugs often increases both sleep disturbance and cognitive dysfunction. A chronobiological approach with bright-light therapy, melatonin administration, restricted time in bed, and diurnal activity may be an interesting therapeutic alternative in the management of sleep-wake disorders in Alzheimer patients. The aim of these therapeutics is to improve sleep and diurnal activity and consequently to increase the quality of life in Alzheimer patients.

Ooms, S. and Y. E. Ju (2016). "Treatment of Sleep Disorders in Dementia." Curr Treat Options Neurol 18(9): 40.
	Sleep and circadian disorders occur frequently in all types of dementia. Due to the multifactorial nature of sleep problems in dementia, we propose a structured approach to the evaluation and treatment of these patients. Primary sleep disorders such as obstructive sleep apnea should be treated first. Comorbid conditions and medications that impact sleep should be optimally managed to minimize negative effects on sleep. Patients and caregivers should maintain good sleep hygiene, and social and physical activity should be encouraged during the daytime. Given the generally benign nature of bright light therapy and melatonin, these treatments should be tried first. Pharmacological treatments should be added cautiously, due to the risk of cognitive side effects, sedation, and falls in the demented and older population. Regardless of treatment modality, it is essential to follow patients with dementia and sleep disorders closely, with serial monitoring of individual response to treatment.

O'Reardon, J. P., et al. (2005). "Night eating syndrome : diagnosis, epidemiology and management." CNS Drugs 19(12): 997-1008.
	Night eating syndrome (NES) is an eating disorder characterised by the clinical features of morning anorexia, evening hyperphagia, and insomnia with awakenings followed by nocturnal food ingestion. The core clinical feature appears to be a delay in the circadian timing of food intake. Energy intake is reduced in the first half of the day and greatly increased in the second half, such that sleep is disrupted in the service of food intake. The syndrome can be distinguished from bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder by the lack of associated compensatory behaviours, the timing of food intake and the fact that the food ingestions are small, amounting to repeated snacks rather than true binges. NES also differs from sleep-related eating disorder by the presence of full awareness, as opposed to parasomnic nocturnal ingestions. NES is of importance clinically because of its association with obesity. Its prevalence rises with increasing weight, and about half of those diagnosed with it report a normal weight status before the onset of the syndrome. The recognition and effective treatment of NES may be an increasingly important way to treat a subset of the obese population. Treatment of the syndrome, however, is still in its infancy. One clinical trial has reported efficacy with the SSRI sertraline. Other treatments, such as the anticonvulsant topiramate, phototherapy and other SSRIs, may also offer future promise.

Pallesen, S., et al. (2005). "Bright light treatment has limited effect in subjects over 55 years with mild early morning awakening." Percept Mot Skills 101(3): 759-770.
	31 subjects, age 55 yr. or older, suffering from mild early morning awakening were randomized to either a bright light (10,000 lux) or to a red dim light placebo condition (200 lux). Light exposure took place in the evening in the patients' homes, 60 to 30 min. before bedtime and lasted for 3 wk. The subjects kept a sleep diary for 2 wk. and wore an actigraph for 1 wk. both before treatment and at post-treatment. Of the eight sleep diary outcome variables, significant effects that could be attributed to the light treatment were only detected for time spent in bed after final morning awakening. None of the six actigraph outcome variables yielded any significant effect of the light therapy. Explanations for the limited therapeutic effects of bright light treatment obtained in the present study are discussed, such as the criteria defining early morning awakening, the selection procedure, problems with compliance, age of the sample, and the dose of light. The lack of an objective circadian marker in this study could represent a problem concerning the timing of the light exposure. Despite the limited success of bright light therapy in this study, bright light therapy should still be considered as a treatment option for early morning awakening.

Pandi-Perumal, S. R., et al. (2008). "The roles of melatonin and light in the pathophysiology and treatment of circadian rhythm sleep disorders." Nat Clin Pract Neurol 4(8): 436-447.
	Normal circadian rhythms are synchronized to a regular 24 h environmental light-dark cycle, and the suprachiasmatic nucleus and the hormone melatonin have important roles in this process. Desynchronization of circadian rhythms, as occurs in chronobiological disorders, can produce severe disturbances in sleep patterns. According to the International Classification of Sleep Disorders, circadian rhythm sleep disorders (CRSDs) include delayed sleep phase syndrome, advanced sleep phase syndrome, non-24 h sleep-wake disorder, jet lag and shift-work sleep disorder. Disturbances in the circadian phase position of plasma melatonin levels have been documented in all of these disorders. There is compelling evidence to implicate endogenous melatonin as an important mediator in CRSD pathophysiology, although further research involving large numbers of patients will be required to clarify whether the disruption of melatonin secretion is a causal factor in CRSDs. In this Review, we focus on the use of exogenous melatonin and light therapy to treat the disturbed sleep-wake rhythms seen in CRSDs.

Paul, M. A., et al. (2015). "Light treatment improves sleep quality and negative affectiveness in high arctic residents during winter." Photochem Photobiol 91(3): 567-573.
	The seasonal extremes of photoperiod in the high Arctic place particular strain on the human circadian system, which leads to trouble sleeping and increased feelings of negative affect in the winter months. To qualify for our study, potential participants had to have been at Canadian Forces Station (CFS) Alert (82° 30' 00″ N) for at least 2 weeks. Subjects filled out questionnaires regarding sleep difficulty, psychological well-being and mood and wore Actigraphs to obtain objective sleep data. Saliva was collected at regular intervals on two occasions, 2 weeks apart, to measure melatonin and assess melatonin onset. Individuals with a melatonin rhythm that was in disaccord with their sleep schedule were given individualized daily light treatment interventions based on their pretreatment salivary melatonin profile. The light treatment prescribed to seven of the twelve subjects was effective in improving sleep quality both subjectively, based on questionnaire results, and objectively, based on the actigraphic data. The treatment also caused a significant reduction in negative affect among the participants. Since the treatment is noninvasive and has minimal associated side effects, our results support the use of the light visors at CFS Alert and other northern outposts during the winter for individuals who are experiencing sleep difficulty or low mood.

Peter-Derex, L., et al. (2015). "Sleep and Alzheimer's disease." Sleep Med Rev 19: 29-38.
	Sleep disorders are frequent in Alzheimer's disease (AD), with a significant impact on patients and caregivers and a major risk factor for early institutionalization. Micro-architectural sleep alterations, nocturnal sleep fragmentation, decrease in nocturnal sleep duration, diurnal napping and even inversion of the sleep-wake cycle are the main disorders observed in patients with AD. Experimental and epidemiological evidence for a close reciprocal interaction between cognitive decline and sleep alterations is growing. Management of sleep disorders in AD is pre-eminently behavioral. Association of melatonin and bright light treatment seems to be promising as well. The presence of sleep complaints, especially excessive somnolence in demented patients, should draw attention to possible associated sleep pathologies such as sleep apnea syndrome or restless legs syndrome.

Phelps, J. (2008). "Dark therapy for bipolar disorder using amber lenses for blue light blockade." Med Hypotheses 70(2): 224-229.
	"Dark Therapy", in which complete darkness is used as a mood stabilizer in bipolar disorder, roughly the converse of light therapy for depression, has support in several preliminary studies. Although data are limited, darkness itself appears to organize and stabilize circadian rhythms. Yet insuring complete darkness from 6 p.m. to 8 a.m. the following morning, as used in several studies thus far, is highly impractical and not accepted by patients. However, recent data on the physiology of human circadian rhythm suggests that "virtual darkness" may be achievable by blocking blue wavelengths of light. A recently discovered retinal photoreceptor, whose fibers connect only to the biological clock region of the hypothalamus, has been shown to respond only to a narrow band of wavelengths around 450 nm. Amber-tinted safety glasses, which block transmission of these wavelengths, have already been shown to preserve normal nocturnal melatonin levels in a light environment which otherwise completely suppresses melatonin production. Therefore it may be possible to influence human circadian rhythms by using these lenses at night to blunt the impact of electrical light, particularly the blue light of ubiquitous television screens, by creating a "virtual darkness". One way to investigate this would be to provide the lenses to patients with severe sleep disturbance of probable circadian origin. A preliminary case series herein demonstrates that some patients with bipolar disorder experience reduced sleep-onset latency with this approach, suggesting a circadian effect. If amber lenses can effectively simulate darkness, a broad range of conditions might respond to this inexpensive therapeutic tool: common forms of insomnia; sleep deprivation in nursing mothers; circadian rhythm disruption in shift workers; and perhaps even rapid cycling bipolar disorder, a difficult- to -treat variation of a common illness.

Poirrier, R. (2001). "[Photoperiod phototherapy and wakefulness-sleep rhythm disorders]." Rev Neurol (Paris) 157(11 Pt 2): S140-144.
	Bright light therapy is a recent physical treatment in chronodisabled situations. The most recognized indication is the seasonal affective disorder. However, any disease or dysfunction where a misalignment of sleep-wake and circadian rhythms may be suspected is a potential tool for this treatment. Analyses of the literature throughout the interpretation methods of the evidence based medicine indicate that bright light therapy, if not a standard, could be recommended in a number of circadian rhythm sleep disorders, mainly the delayed and advanced sleep phase syndromes. Time aspects are essential for the success of phototherapy. From this point of view, easy and practical technological means or methods, allowing to shape a Phase Response Curve in each individual to be treated, should be clear progress. A future extension of indications will also depend on the checking of essential hypotheses linking circadian and sleep-wake rhythms in diseases such as psychophysiological insomnia, multiple sclerosis, brain dysgeneses or dementias. At last, a non negligible advantage of bright light therapy appears to be its relative safety.

Ponsford, J. L., et al. (2012). "Fatigue and sleep disturbance following traumatic brain injury--their nature, causes, and potential treatments." J Head Trauma Rehabil 27(3): 224-233.
	BACKGROUND: Although fatigue and sleep disturbance are commonly reported following traumatic brain injury (TBI), understanding of their nature and treatment remains limited. OBJECTIVES: This article reviews a series of investigations of the nature and causes of fatigue and sleep disturbance following TBI. METHODS: A large cohort of community-based patients with TBI, recruited from a TBI rehabilitation program, completed measures of subjective fatigue and sleep disturbances, as well as attentional measures. A subgroup of participants completed polysomnography and assessment of dim light melatonin onset. RESULTS: Fatigue and sleep disturbance are common. Both are associated with anxiety, depression, and pain. However, fatigue is also associated with slowed information processing and the need for increased effort in performing tasks. Sleep disturbances contribute to fatigue. Objective sleep studies show reduced sleep efficiency, increased sleep onset latency, and increased time awake after sleep onset. Depression and pain exacerbate but cannot entirely account for these problems. There is increased slow-wave sleep. Individuals with TBI show lower levels of evening melatonin production, associated with less rapid-eye movement sleep. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest potential treatments including cognitive behavior therapy supporting lifestyle modifications, pharmacologic treatments with modafinil and melatonin, and light therapy to enhance alertness, vigilance, and mood. Controlled trials of these interventions are needed.

Potharajaroen, S., et al. (2018). "Bright light and oxygen therapies decrease delirium risk in critically ill surgical patients by targeting sleep and acid-base disturbances." Psychiatry Res 261: 21-27.
	This study examined the effects of bright light therapy (BLT) on the incidence of delirium in post-operative patients admitted to a surgical intensive care unit (SICU) and delineates risk and protective factors. We included 62 patients in a single-blind, randomized controlled study. The intervention group was treated with care as usual plus BLT for three consecutive days. Delirium was diagnosed by DSM-5 criteria with the Confusion Assessment Method-Intensive Care Unit (CAM-ICU). Risk factors for delirium were measured, including the APACHE II score, Insomnia Severity Index (ISI), as well as hematocrit and bicarbonate levels. Results were adjusted for treatment with nasal cannula oxygen and medications. Thirteen patients developed delirium within the three days following surgery. Generalized estimating equations analysis showed a significant preventive effect of BLT on delirium, which was independent of risk or treatment factors. Higher APACHE-II and ISI scores, lower hematocrit and lower bicarbonate levels increased the risk of developing delirium. BLT plus nasal cannula oxygen significantly reduced the likelihood of delirium. BLT significantly lowered ISI scores, while nasal cannula oxygen significantly enhanced bicarbonate levels. The results indicate that BLT and supplementary oxygen therapy may protect against delirium by targeting sleep-wake and deficits in the bicarbonate buffer system.

Pracka, D. (1999). "[Phototherapy in the clinic]." Postepy Hig Med Dosw 53(3): 517-523.
	From early centuries sun light has been considered as a source of life energy and a life donor. Seasonal changes in human behaviour and mood have been already described in details by psychiatrists since the beginning of the XX century. In the last twenties systematic studies on animals and humans have provided the evidence that bright light is the strongest exogenous synchronizer of endogenous biological rhythms. In some people bright light deficiency induces changes of mood and symptoms of the seasonal affective disorder (SAD). SAD is characterised by fall and winter depressions, hypersomnias, augmented appetite with carbohydrate cravings, and weight gain alternating with non-depressed periods with normal behaviour in the spring and summer. There is also a minor depressive form of the illness called sub-syndromal (S-SAD) or "winter blues". The molecular mechanisms of this disorder remine unknown. In the last decade the few hypothesis on the etiology of SAD, confirming experimentally more or less, have been developed. From the beginning of eighties SAD is successfully treated with bright light (phototherapy). This way of the natural treatment can be also used in Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorders such as Jet Lag Syndrome, Shift Work Sleep Disorder or others. An application of phototherapy in clinic gives opportunity for the progress of a new way of treatment--chronotherapy and it seems to be the attainment of chronobiology in practical medicine.

Prasko, J. (2008). "Bright light therapy." Neuro Endocrinol Lett 29 Suppl 1: 33-64.
	Bright light is a treatment of choice for seasonal affective disorder. Other indications for bright light therapy have also been tested. These include non-seasonal depression, bipolar depression, chronic depressive disorder, ante- and postpartum depression, late luteal phase dysphoric disorder, circadian phase sleep disorders, jet lag, shift work problems, and behavioral disturbance and insomnia in organic dementia. Future studies should focus on exploring the use of light therapy in combination with sleep deprivation, other classes of antidepressants, and with psychotherapy and their possible combined effect on subtypes of depression or other mentioned diagnoses, light treatment duration, and the applicability and efficacy of adjunct light treatment for in-patients.

Prasko, J., et al. (2010). "Augmentation of antidepressants with bright light therapy in patients with comorbid depression and borderline personality disorder." Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub 154(4): 355-361.
	BACKGROUND: Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is typically characterized by instability and impaired behaviour, affectivity, interpersonal relations and lifestyle. The most common condition comorbid with BPD is a depressive episode. Depression is associated with severe disturbance of the circadian rhythms. This is apparent in depressive patients with BPD. Both sleep and diurnal rhythms are disturbed and the symptoms fluctuate. Bright light may be an effective in treatment of seasonal affective disorder, circadian sleep disorder and jet lag. It also improves sleep-wake patterns and behavioural disorders in hospitalized patients with Alzheimer's disease. Several studies have suggested antidepressant effects of phototherapy in non-seasonal depressive episodes. The treatment of comorbid depressive disorder and borderline personality disorder (BPD) is usually reported to be less successful than the treatment of patients without personality disorder. Studies describing the use of bright light in depressed patients with comorbid BPD have not been published so far. METHOD: The aim of this open study was to assess the effectiveness of a 6-week combined therapy with the application of bright light (10,000 lux, 6:30 to 7:30 a.m. for 6 weeks) added to SSRIs in drug-resistant depressed patients with comorbid BPD who did not respond with improvement to 6-week administration of antidepressants. The study comprised 13 female patients who met the ICD-10 diagnostic criteria for research and the DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria for major depression. The participants were regularly evaluated using the CGI, HAMD and MADRS scales and the BDI and BDI self-report inventories. RESULTS: According to all the assessment instruments, the application of bright white light leads to a significant improvement. However, the results must be interpreted with caution due to the open nature of the study.

Prodhan, A., et al. (2021). "Melatonin and Sleep Disturbances in Alzheimer's Disease." CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 20(8): 736-754.
	Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by sleep, behavioral, memory, and cognitive deteriorations. Sleep disturbance (SD) is a major disease burden in AD, which has a reciprocal relationship with AD pathophysiology. It aggravates memory, behavioral, and cognitive complications in AD. Different studies have found that melatonin hormone levels reduce even in the pre-clinical stages of AD. Melatonin is the primary sleep-regulating hormone and a potent antioxidant with neuroprotective roles. The decrease in melatonin levels can thus promote SD and AD neuropathology. Exogenous melatonin has the potential to alleviate neuropathology and SD in AD by different mechanisms. Various studies have been conducted to assess the efficacy of exogenous melatonin to treat SD in AD. Though most of the studies suggest that melatonin is useful to ameliorate SD in AD, the remaining studies show opposite results. The timing, dosage, and duration of melatonin administration along with disease condition, genetic, environmental, and some other factors can be responsible for the discrepancies between the studies. More extensive trials with longer durations and higher dosage forms and studies including bright light therapy and melatonin agonists (ramelteon, agomelatine, and tasimelteon) should be performed to determine the efficacy of melatonin to treat SD in AD.

Pun, T. B., et al. (2022). "The Effect of Light Therapy on Electroencephalographic Sleep in Sleep and Circadian Rhythm Disorders: A Scoping Review." Clocks Sleep 4(3): 358-373.
	Light therapy is used to treat sleep and circadian rhythm disorders, yet there are limited studies on whether light therapy impacts electroencephalographic (EEG) activity during sleep. Therefore, we aimed to provide an overview of research studies that examined the effects of light therapy on sleep macro- and micro-architecture in populations with sleep and circadian rhythm disorders. We searched for randomized controlled trials that used light therapy and included EEG sleep measures using MEDLINE, PubMed, CINAHL, PsycINFO and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials databases. Five articles met the inclusion criteria of patients with either insomnia or delayed sleep−wake phase disorder (DSWPD). These trials reported sleep macro-architecture outcomes using EEG or polysomnography. Three insomnia trials showed no effect of the timing or intensity of light therapy on total sleep time, wake after sleep onset, sleep efficiency and sleep stage duration compared to controls. Only one insomnia trial reported significantly higher sleep efficiency after evening light therapy (>4000 lx between 21:00−23:00 h) compared with afternoon light therapy (>4000 lx between 15:00−17:00 h). In the only DSWPD trial, six multiple sleep latency tests were conducted across the day (09:00 and 19:00 h) and bright light (2500 lx) significantly lengthened sleep latency in the morning (09:00 and 11:00 h) compared to control light (300 lx). None of the five trials reported any sleep micro-architecture measures. Overall, there was limited research about the effect of light therapy on EEG sleep measures, and studies were confined to patients with insomnia and DSWPD only. More research is needed to better understand whether lighting interventions in clinical populations affect sleep macro- and micro-architecture and objective sleep timing and quality.

Quera Salva, M. A., et al. (2020). "Blue-Enriched White Light Therapy Reduces Fatigue in Survivors of Severe Traumatic Brain Injury: A Randomized Controlled Trial." J Head Trauma Rehabil 35(2): E78-e85.
	OBJECTIVE: Fatigue is one of the disabling sequelae of traumatic brain injury (TBI), with repercussions on quality of life, rehabilitation, and professional reintegration. Research is needed on effective interventions. We evaluated efficacy of blue-enriched white light (BWL) therapy on fatigue of patients with severe TBI. SETTING: Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and Physiology departments of University hospitals. PARTICIPANTS: Adult patients with fatigue symptoms following severe TBI, Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) score 4 or more, Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) score 10 or more, and/or Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI]) more than 5 were randomly assigned to one of 2 parallel groups: a BWL therapy group, with 30-minute exposure to waking white light enriched with blue for 4 weeks, and a group without light therapy (N-BWL), no light. DESIGN: Randomized controlled trial. ClinicalTrials.gov number: NCT02420275. MAIN MEASURES: The primary outcome measure was the response of the FSS to 4 weeks of treatment. In addition, we assessed latency change of the P300 component of event-related potentials before and after therapy. RESULTS: Significant improvement in the FSS score (P = .026) was found in the BWL group compared with the N-BWL group. CONCLUSION: BWL phototherapy reduces fatigue in patients with severe TBI.

Quera Salva, M. A., et al. (2011). "Circadian rhythms, melatonin and depression." Curr Pharm Des 17(15): 1459-1470.
	The master biological clock situated in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the anterior hypothalamus plays a vital role in orchestrating the circadian rhythms of multiple biological processes. Increasing evidence points to a role of the biological clock in the development of depression. In seasonal depression and in bipolar disorders it seems likely that the circadian system plays a vital role in the genesis of the disorder. For major unipolar depressive disorder (MDD) available data suggest a primary involvement of the circadian system but further and larger studies are necessary to conclude. Melatonin and melatonin agonists have chronobiotic effects, which mean that they can readjust the circadian system. Seasonal affective disorders and mood disturbances caused by circadian malfunction are theoretically treatable by manipulating the circadian system using chronobiotic drugs, chronotherapy or bright light therapy. In MDD, melatonin alone has no antidepressant action but novel melatoninergic compounds demonstrate antidepressant properties. Of these, the most advanced is the novel melatonin agonist agomelatine, which combines joint MT1 and MT2 agonism with 5-HT(2C) receptor antagonism. Adding a chronobiotic effect to the inhibition of 5-HT(2C) receptors may explain the rapid impact of agomelatine on depression, since studies showed that agomelatine had an early impact on sleep quality and alertness at awakening. Further studies are necessary in order to better characterize the effect of agomelatine and other novel melatoninergic drugs on the circadian system of MDD patients. In summary, antidepressants with intrinsic chronobiotic properties offer a novel approach to treatment of depression.

Raikes, A. C., et al. (2020). "Daily Morning Blue Light Therapy Improves Daytime Sleepiness, Sleep Quality, and Quality of Life Following a Mild Traumatic Brain Injury." J Head Trauma Rehabil 35(5): E405-e421.
	OBJECTIVE: Identify the treatment effects of 6 weeks of daily 30-minute sessions of morning blue light therapy compared with placebo amber light therapy in the treatment of sleep disruption following mild traumatic brain injury. DESIGN: Placebo-controlled randomized trial. PARTICIPANTS: Adults aged 18 to 45 years with a mild traumatic brain injury within the past 18 months (n = 35). MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Epworth Sleepiness Scale, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, Beck Depression Inventory II, Rivermead Post-concussion Symptom Questionnaire, Functional Outcomes of Sleep Questionnaire, and actigraphy-derived sleep measures. RESULTS: Following treatment, moderate to large improvements were observed with individuals in the blue light therapy group reporting lower Epworth Sleepiness Scale (Hedges' g = 0.882), Beck Depression Inventory II (g = 0.684), Rivermead Post-concussion Symptom Questionnaire chronic (g = 0.611), and somatic (g = 0.597) symptoms, and experiencing lower normalized wake after sleep onset (g = 0.667) than those in the amber light therapy group. In addition, individuals in the blue light therapy group experienced greater total sleep time (g = 0.529) and reported improved Functional Outcomes of Sleep Questionnaire scores (g = 0.929) than those in the amber light therapy group. CONCLUSION: Daytime sleepiness, fatigue, and sleep disruption are common following a mild traumatic brain injury. These findings further substantiate blue light therapy as a promising nonpharmacological approach to improve these sleep-related complaints with the added benefit of improved postconcussion symptoms and depression severity.

Regestein, Q. R. and M. Pavlova (1995). "Treatment of delayed sleep phase syndrome." Gen Hosp Psychiatry 17(5): 335-345.
	Delayed sleep phase syndrome (DSPS) is a common but little reported cause of severe insomnia. Affected individuals complain of difficulty falling asleep and difficulty awaking at socially acceptable hours. It results from a dysregulation of the circadian sleep-wake cycle. DSPS presents in clinically heterogenous ways as modulated by motivation, psychopathology, drug status, and treatment compliance factors. Patients respond variably to the range of possible treatments. Bright light treatment potentially corrects the circadian abnormality of DSPS. Other treatments reported to relieve some DSPS patients include schedule shifts, drugs, and vitamin and hormone treatments. The safety and efficacy of light treatment have not been conventionally defined, but available information suggests that it is ophthalmologically safe. At present, DSPS must be managed empirically by various methods.

Reuss, A. M., et al. (2021). "Blue-light treatment reduces spontaneous and evoked pain in a human experimental pain model." Pain Rep 6(4): e968.
	INTRODUCTION: Chronic pain is a frequent severe disease and often associated with anxiety, depression, insomnia, disability, and reduced quality of life. This maladaptive condition is further characterized by sensory loss, hyperalgesia, and allodynia. Blue light has been hypothesized to modulate sensory neurons and thereby influence nociception. OBJECTIVES: Here, we compared the effects of blue light vs red light and thermal control on pain sensation in a human experimental pain model. METHODS: Pain, hyperalgesia, and allodynia were induced in 30 healthy volunteers through high-density transcutaneous electrical stimulation. Subsequently, blue light, red light, or thermal control treatment was applied in a cross-over design. The nonvisual effects of the respective light treatments were examined using a well-established quantitative sensory testing protocol. Somatosensory parameters as well as pain intensity and quality were scored. RESULTS: Blue light substantially reduced spontaneous pain as assessed by numeric rating scale pain scoring. Similarly, pain quality was significantly altered as assessed by the German counterpart of the McGill Pain Questionnaire. Furthermore, blue light showed antihyperalgesic, antiallodynic, and antihypesthesic effects in contrast to red light or thermal control treatment. CONCLUSION: Blue-light phototherapy ameliorates pain intensity and quality in a human experimental pain model and reveals antihyperalgesic, antiallodynic, and antihypesthesic effects. Therefore, blue-light phototherapy may be a novel approach to treat pain in multiple conditions.

Richardson, C., et al. (2019). "Cognitive "insomnia" processes in delayed sleep-wake phase disorder: Do they exist and are they responsive to chronobiological treatment?" J Consult Clin Psychol 87(1): 16-32.
	OBJECTIVE: To systematically investigate whether cognitive "insomnia" processes are implicated in adolescent Delayed Sleep-Wake Phase Disorder (DSWPD) and to examine whether these processes are responsive to chronobiological treatment. METHOD: Sixty-three adolescents (M = 15.8 ± 2.2 years, 63.5% f) diagnosed with DSWPD and 40 good sleeping adolescents (M = 15.9 ± 2.4 years, 75% f) completed baseline measures of sleep, daytime functioning and cognitive "insomnia" processes (i.e., repetitive negative thinking, physiological hyperarousal, distress, sleep-related attention and monitoring, sleep misperception). Sixty DSWPD adolescents (M = 15.9 ± 2.2 y, 63% f) entered a treatment trial and received 3 weeks of light therapy. Sleep, daytime functioning, and insomnia were measured again post-treatment and at 3-month follow-up. RESULTS: Adolescents with DSWPD had significantly later sleep timing (d = 0.99-1.50), longer sleep latency (d = 1.14), and shorter total sleep time (d = 0.85) on school nights, compared with the good sleeping adolescents. There was evidence of cognitive "insomnia" symptoms, with the DSWPD group reporting more repetitive negative thinking (d = 0.70-1.02), trait hyperarousal (d = 0.55), distress (d = 2.19), sleep associated monitoring (d = 0.76), and sleep onset misperception (d = 1.29). Across treatment and follow-up, adolescents with DSWPD reported advanced sleep timing (d = 0.54-0.62), reduced sleep latency (d = 0.53), increased total sleep time (d = 0.49), and improved daytime functioning (d = 0.46-1.00). Repetitive negative thinking (d = 0.64-0.96), physiological arousal (d = 0.69), distress (d = 0.87), and sleep onset misperception (d = 0.37) also showed improvement. CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive "insomnia" processes may be implicated in the development and maintenance of DSWPD in adolescents. Many of these processes are amendable to chronobiological treatment; however, residual symptoms may place adolescents at risk of poor treatment outcome or relapse. (PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2018 APA, all rights reserved).

Richter, K., et al. (2020). "[Treatment of insomnia in old age]." Z Gerontol Geriatr 53(2): 105-111.
	Insomnia is one of the most frequent health disorders in old age. It causes suffering and numerous health problems. Therefore, treatment is often indicated. Behavioral therapy is the treatment of choice even in older individuals. In addition, light therapy also has an important role. Pharmacological treatment measures are less well studied, the benefits in long-term use are unclear and should only be applied in the short term to reduce suffering as well as being integrated into a comprehensive treatment concept.

Ricketts, E. J., et al. (2022). "Morning light therapy in adults with Tourette's disorder." J Neurol 269(1): 399-410.
	BACKGROUND: Sleep disturbance is common among individuals with Tourette's Disorder (TD). Given that sleep is influenced by the circadian system, this study examined circadian rhythms and sleep in adults with TD, and explored the possible benefit of short-wavelength wearable morning light therapy. METHODS: Participants were 34 adults with TD (n = 14) and age- and sex-matched healthy controls (HC; n = 20). Participants were screened using clinician-rated diagnostic and tic severity interviews, and procedures lasted 3 consecutive weeks. Participants completed a baseline week of actigraphy. Adults with TD completed 2 weeks of Re-Timer™ morning light therapy and continued actigraphy monitoring. Dim light melatonin-onset (DLMO) phase assessment, tic severity interview, and measures of chronotype, sleep disturbance, daytime sleepiness, disability, depression, anxiety, and stress were completed at baseline and post-intervention. RESULTS: Adults with TD reported significantly greater eveningness and sleep disturbance relative to controls. Per wrist actigraphy, adults with TD exhibited significantly longer sleep-onset latency, lower sleep efficiency, and greater sleep fragmentation than HC. Following morning light therapy, there was a significant advance in DLMO phase, but not self-report or actigraphy sleep variables. There were small, statistically significant decreases in tic severity and impairment. There were also significant reductions in daytime sleepiness, and self-reported anxiety, but not depression, stress, or disability. Participants reported minimal side effects and rated light therapy as acceptable and comfortable. CONCLUSIONS: Findings showed some benefits following brief light therapy in TD; further exploration of the impact of spectral tuning the photic environment as part of treatment for TD subjects is warranted.

Riemann, D., et al. (2017). "European guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of insomnia." J Sleep Res 26(6): 675-700.
	This European guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of insomnia was developed by a task force of the European Sleep Research Society, with the aim of providing clinical recommendations for the management of adult patients with insomnia. The guideline is based on a systematic review of relevant meta-analyses published till June 2016. The target audience for this guideline includes all clinicians involved in the management of insomnia, and the target patient population includes adults with chronic insomnia disorder. The GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) system was used to grade the evidence and guide recommendations. The diagnostic procedure for insomnia, and its co-morbidities, should include a clinical interview consisting of a sleep history (sleep habits, sleep environment, work schedules, circadian factors), the use of sleep questionnaires and sleep diaries, questions about somatic and mental health, a physical examination and additional measures if indicated (i.e. blood tests, electrocardiogram, electroencephalogram; strong recommendation, moderate- to high-quality evidence). Polysomnography can be used to evaluate other sleep disorders if suspected (i.e. periodic limb movement disorder, sleep-related breathing disorders), in treatment-resistant insomnia, for professional at-risk populations and when substantial sleep state misperception is suspected (strong recommendation, high-quality evidence). Cognitive behavioural therapy for insomnia is recommended as the first-line treatment for chronic insomnia in adults of any age (strong recommendation, high-quality evidence). A pharmacological intervention can be offered if cognitive behavioural therapy for insomnia is not sufficiently effective or not available. Benzodiazepines, benzodiazepine receptor agonists and some antidepressants are effective in the short-term treatment of insomnia (≤4 weeks; weak recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). Antihistamines, antipsychotics, melatonin and phytotherapeutics are not recommended for insomnia treatment (strong to weak recommendations, low- to very-low-quality evidence). Light therapy and exercise need to be further evaluated to judge their usefulness in the treatment of insomnia (weak recommendation, low-quality evidence). Complementary and alternative treatments (e.g. homeopathy, acupuncture) are not recommended for insomnia treatment (weak recommendation, very-low-quality evidence).

Rios Romenets, S., et al. (2013). "Doxepin and cognitive behavioural therapy for insomnia in patients with Parkinson's disease -- a randomized study." Parkinsonism Relat Disord 19(7): 670-675.
	INTRODUCTION: Although a variety of pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic treatments are effective for insomnia in the general population, insomnia in Parkinson's disease differs in important ways and may need different treatments. No studies have conclusively demonstrated effective insomnia treatments in Parkinson's disease. METHODS: We conducted a three-arm six-week randomized pilot study assessing non-pharmacologic treatment (cognitive behavioural therapy with bright light therapy) or doxepin (10 mg daily), compared to an inactive placebo in Parkinson's patients with insomnia. Sleep outcomes included insomnia scales, clinical global impression, sleep diaries and actigraphy. Secondary outcomes included motor severity, fatigue, depression and quality of life. RESULTS: 18 patients were randomized, 6 to each group. Compared to placebo, doxepin improved the Insomnia Severity Index (-9 ± 5.4 vs. -2 ± 3.9, p = 0.03), the SCOPA-night score (-5.2 ± 1.5 vs. -2.3 ± 2.8, p = 0.049), the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index-sleep disturbances subscale (-0.5 ± 0.5 vs 0.2 ± 0.4, p = 0.02), and both patient and examiner-rated clinical global impression of change (1.7 ± 0.8 vs. 0.5 ± 0.8, p = 0.03 and 1.4 ± 0.5 vs. 0.3 ± 0.5, p = 0.003). On secondary outcomes doxepin reduced the fatigue severity scale (p = 0.02) and improved scores on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (p = 0.007). Non-pharmacological treatment reduced the Insomnia Severity Index (-7.8 ± 3.8 vs. -2.0 ± 3.9, p = 0.03), and the examiner-reported clinical global impression of change (p = 0.006), but was associated with decline in Parkinson Disease Questionnaire-39. There were no changes in other primary and secondary outcomes, including actigraphy outcomes. Adverse events were comparable in all groups. CONCLUSION: Doxepin and non-pharmacologic treatment substantially improved insomnia in Parkinson's disease. These potential benefits must be replicated in a full confirmatory randomized controlled trial.

Rissling, M., et al. (2022). "Preventing Sleep Disruption With Bright Light Therapy During Chemotherapy for Breast Cancer: A Phase II Randomized Controlled Trial." Front Neurosci 16: 815872.
	PURPOSE: The goal of this study was to examine whether daily increased morning light exposure would maintain or improve sleep and the circadian pattern of relatively more activity in the day and less during the night in women undergoing chemotherapy for breast cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS: Participants were 39 women with newly diagnosed breast cancer, randomized to either 30-mins of daily morning bright white light (BWL) or dim red light (DRL). Sleep/wake was measured objectively for 72-h with wrist actigraphy and subjectively with the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) prior to and during chemotherapy cycles 1 and 4. The study was registered with the National Institutes of Health ClinicalTrials.gov (Clinical Trials number: NCT00478257). RESULTS: Results from actigraphy suggested that compared to the DRL group, women in the BWL group had longer night-time sleep, fewer sleep disturbances during the night, and had fewer and shorter daytime naps at the end of cycle 4 of chemotherapy as well as exhibiting less activity at night and more activity during the day by the end of cycle 4. Results from PSQI indicated that components of sleep quality improved but daytime dysfunction deteriorated during cycle 4 treatment in the BWL group; meanwhile the DRL group used more sleep medications in the treatment weeks which might have led to the improved sleep quality during the recovery weeks of both cycles. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that bright white light therapy administered every morning on awakening may protect women undergoing chemotherapy for breast cancer from nighttime sleep and daytime wake disruption. Randomized clinical trials in larger samples are needed to confirm these findings.

Rizza, S., et al. (2022). "Impact of light therapy on rotating night shift workers: the EuRhythDia study." Acta Diabetol 59(12): 1589-1596.
	AIMS: Disturbances in circadian rhythms may promote cardiometabolic disorders in rotating night shift workers (r-NSWs). We hypothesized that timed light therapy might reverse disrupted circadian rhythms and glucose intolerance observed among r-NSWs). METHODS: R-NSWs were randomly assigned to a protocol that included 12 weeks on followed by 12 weeks off light therapy (n = 13; 6 men; mean age, 39.5 ± 7.3 years) or a no-treatment control group (n = 9; 3 men; mean age 41.7 ± 6.3 years). Experimental and control participants underwent identical metabolic evaluations that included anthropometric, metabolic (including oral glucose tolerance tests), lipid, and inflammation-associated parameters together with an assessment of sleep quality and expression of circadian transcription factors REV-ERBα and BMAL1 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) at baseline, 12 weeks, and 24 weeks of the protocol. RESULTS: Twelve weeks of warm white-light exposure (10,000 lx at 35 cm for 30 min per day) had no impact on sleep, metabolic, or inflammation-associated parameters among r-NSWs in the experimental group. However, our findings revealed significant decreases in REV-ERBα gene expression (p = 0.048) and increases in the REV-ERBα/BMAL1 ratio (p = 0.040) compared to baseline in PBMCs isolated from this cohort. Diminished expression of REV-ERBα persisted, although the REV-ERBα/BMAL1 ratio returned to baseline levels after the subsequent 12-day wash-out period. CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed that intermittent light therapy had no impact on inflammatory parameters or glucose tolerance in a defined cohort of r-NSWs. However, significant changes in the expression of circadian clock genes were detected in PBMCs of these subjects undergoing light therapy.

Robinson, D. G., et al. (2018). "Low-Level Nighttime Light Therapy for Age-Related Macular Degeneration: A Randomized Clinical Trial." Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 59(11): 4531-4541.
	PURPOSE: To investigate the safety, acceptability, and effectiveness of light therapy on the progression of AMD over 12 months. METHODS: This was a phase I/IIa, prospective, proof-of-concept, single-center, unmasked randomized controlled trial. Sixty participants (55 to 88 years) with early AMD in the study eye and neovascular AMD (nAMD) in the fellow eye were recruited from a hospital nAMD clinic. Eligible participants were randomized (ratio 1:1) to receive light therapy or to an untreated control group. Light therapy was delivered via a light-emitting mask (peak 505 nm, 23 scotopic Td), which was worn each night for 12 months. Co-primary outcome measures were disease progression (onset of nAMD or increased drusen volume beyond test-retest limits) and change in time constant of cone dark adaptation. Other main outcomes included adverse events, compliance, and subjective sleep quality data. RESULTS: Disease progression over 12 months was seen in 38.1% (18.1%-61.6% confidence interval [CI]) of intervention participants and 48.3% (29.4%-67.5% CI) of controls (Mantel-Haenszel test, common odds ratio = 0.763, P = 0.495). A significantly larger delay in cone adaptation was observed in the intervention group (1.66 ± 0.61 minutes) than in the control group (0.66 ± 0.49 minutes) over the follow-up period. No reported adverse events were deemed to be associated with the intervention. CONCLUSIONS: Although acceptable to the patients, light therapy did not have a substantial effect on the progression of early AMD over 12 months. Further investigation is necessary to discover the permanency and cause of the adverse effect of light therapy on dark adaptation.

Roccaro, I. and D. Smirni (2020). "Fiat Lux: The Light Became Therapy. An Overview on the Bright Light Therapy in Alzheimer's Disease Sleep Disorders." J Alzheimers Dis 77(1): 113-125.
	BACKGROUND: A system of photosensitive retinal ganglion cells provides 'non-visual' information on the circadian sequences of light to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), which, as the 'master clock', synchronizes the chronobiological mechanisms of all the biological clocks. Damage to SCN structure alters circadian behavioral and hormonal rhythms and interferes with a regular sleep-wake pattern. Several studies have shown that, in aging and in Alzheimer's disease (AD), circadian rhythms change their synchronization with the environment and behavior loses sync with light. OBJECTIVE: The current overview aims to examine research studies showing the effect of bright light therapy (BLT) on sleep disorders and sleep-wake patterns in AD. METHODS: A literature search was conducted, taking into consideration the relevant studies over the last 20 years. Fifteen studies have been thorough: seven followed an environmental-architectural approach and eight followed a treatment devices approach. RESULTS: Studies agree in considering BLT as a promising non-pharmacological intervention to compensate for circadian rhythm alterations and they support the need for standardized protocols that allow a comparison between multicenter studies. CONCLUSION: Interestingly, in an attempt to contain the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, health authorities have forced the population to stay home. Therefore, AD people are not currently able to enjoy exposure to sunlight. It is predictable that they may experience an exacerbation of circadian disturbances and that the BLT can be an effective response to prevent such exacerbation.

Rubiño, J. A., et al. (2020). "Bright Light Therapy and Circadian Cycles in Institutionalized Elders." Front Neurosci 14: 359.
	BACKGROUND: Bright light therapy has been found to be an efficient method to improve the main parameters of circadian rhythms. However, institutionalized elders may suffer reduced exposure to diurnal light, which may impair their circadian rhythms, cognitive performance, and general health status. OBJECTIVES: To analyze the effects of 5 days of morning exposure for 90 min to bright light therapy (BLT) applied to institutionalized elderly subjects with mild/moderate cognitive impairment. SUBJECTS: Thirty-seven institutionalized subjects of both sexes, aged 70-93 years. METHODS: The study lasted three consecutive weeks. During the second week the subjects were submitted to BLT (7000-10,000 lux at eye level) on a daily basis. Cognition, attention, and sleep quality were evaluated at the beginning of the first and third week. Circadian variables were recorded continuously throughout the 3 weeks. Non-invasive holders and validated tests were used to analyze the variables studied. RESULTS: After BLT we have found significant improvements in general cognitive capabilities, sleep quality and in the main parameters of the subject's circadian rhythms. The results show that merely 90 min of BLT for five days seems to achieve a significant improvement in a constellation of circadian, sleep, health, and cognitive factors. CONCLUSION: Bright light therapy is an affordable, effective, fast-acting therapy for age-related disturbances, with many advantages over pharmacological alternatives. We hypothesize these effects were the result of activating the residual activity of their presumably weakened circadian system.

Rubiño-Díaz, J., et al. (2021). "[Positive effect of bright light therapy on mood and sleep quality in institutionalized older people]." Rev Esp Geriatr Gerontol 56(6): 354-360.
	INTRODUCTION: Bright light exposure during the day has a positive effect on health and its deficit can cause multiple physiological and cognitive disorders, including depression. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of bright light therapy (BLT) on the quality of sleep and mood emotional state; cognitive status, global deterioration and quality of life in institutionalized elderly. MATERIAL AND METHODS: This is a study with repeated measures design. Thirty-seven older people admitted to a nursing home. The study lasted 3 weeks. The first week, the reference values were established with the Oviedo Sleep Questionnaire, Yesavage Depression Scale, Mini-Mental, Global Scale of Impairment and European Quality of Life Questionnaire. During the second week, they were exposed to BLT (7,000-10,000lx at eye level) between 9:30 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. During the third week, all the data were re-evaluated. RESULTS: All variables improved significantly after the application of light therapy. Sleep (COS) pre-test 4.1±1.49, post-test 4.9±1.46, p: 0.01), mood (pre-test 3.65±2.78, post-test 2.65±2.9, p: 0.01), cognitive state (pre-test 22.72±6.53, post-test 24±5.92, p: 0.001), state of global deterioration (pre-test 3.10±1.26, post-test 2.72±5.92, p: 0.001) and health-related quality of life (pre-test 6.93±1.86, post-test 7.82±1.62, p: 0.001). CONCLUSIONS: Sleep quality, mood, cognitive status, global deterioration status and quality of life significantly improved after the application of light bright therapy.

Rutten, S., et al. (2019). "Bright light therapy for depression in Parkinson disease: A randomized controlled trial." Neurology 92(11): e1145-e1156.
	OBJECTIVE: To assess the efficacy of bright light therapy (BLT) in reducing depressive symptoms in patients with Parkinson disease (PD) and major depressive disorder (MDD) compared to a control light. METHODS: In this double-blind controlled trial, we randomized patients with PD and MDD to treatment with BLT (±10,000 lux) or a control light (±200 lux). Participants were treated for 3 months, followed by a 6-month naturalistic follow-up. The primary outcome of the study was the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS) score. Secondary outcomes were objective and subjective sleep measures and salivary melatonin and cortisol concentrations. Assessments were repeated halfway, at the end of treatment, and 1, 3, and 6 months after treatment. Data were analyzed with a linear mixed-model analysis. RESULTS: We enrolled 83 participants. HDRS scores decreased in both groups without a significant between-group difference at the end of treatment. Subjective sleep quality improved in both groups, with a larger improvement in the BLT group (B [SE] = 0.32 [0.16], p = 0.04). Total salivary cortisol secretion decreased in the BLT group, while it increased in the control group (B [SE] = -8.11 [3.93], p = 0.04). CONCLUSION: BLT was not more effective in reducing depressive symptoms than a control light. Mood and subjective sleep improved in both groups. BLT was more effective in improving subjective sleep quality than control light, possibly through a BLT-induced decrease in cortisol levels. CLINICALTRIALSGOV IDENTIFIER: NCT01604876. CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This study provides Class I evidence that BLT is not superior to a control light device in reducing depressive symptoms in patients with PD with MDD.

Salami, O., et al. (2011). "Treatment of sleep disturbance in Alzheimer's dementia." Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 26(8): 771-782.
	OBJECTIVE: To review the evidence-base behind current treatment options for sleep disturbance in Alzheimer's dementia. DESIGN: A systematic review synthesized the qualitative and quantitative evidence on the treatment of sleep disturbance in Alzheimer's dementia. Studies with interventions targeting sleep disturbance in Alzheimer's dementia or other aspects of the neuropsychiatric symptoms, but which reported an effect on sleep, were included. The Oxford Center for Evidence-Based Medicine criteria was used in the evaluation and scoring of each study based on the quality of the evidence. RESULTS: Thirty-eight studies were included. Majority of the studies enrolled participants with mild to moderate Alzheimer's dementia. Outcome measures included objective sleep assessments including polysomnography (PSG) or actigraphy, caregiver reports, sleep logs, and rating scales. The effectiveness of current treatments for sleep disturbance in Alzheimer's dementia is poor. Of the non-pharmacological treatments, bright light therapy (BLT) has the best results. The pharmacological agents produce inconsistent results and their use is further limited by their potential adverse effects. CONCLUSION: Most current treatments targeting sleep disturbance in Alzheimer's dementia are ineffective. There is a need for further investigation of interventions for treating sleep disturbance in Alzheimer's dementia.

Sartori, S. and R. Poirrier (1996). "[Seasonal affective syndrome and phototherapy: theoretical concepts and clinical applications]." Encephale 22(1): 7-16.
	Since 1984, there has been a great interest in the phenomenon of a particular seasonally recurrent mood disorder called seasonal affective disorder (SAD) or winter depression and its treatment: the phototherapy. Seasonal affective disorder is a syndrome described by Rosenthal in 1984. This mood disorder is characterized by depression with onset recurrent in autumn or winter and spontaneous spring or summer remission. It is associated with hypersomnia, anergia, increased appetite, weight gain and carbohydrate craving. The population prevalence in the north of the USA is estimated between 3 and 5%, but it changes with sex, age and also latitude. A long time ago, we know that animals are photoperiod sensitive and that the melatonin secretion in mammals is suppressed by the light. In 1980, Czeiler reported for the first time that human melatonin secretion can be suppressed by high light exposure (+/- 1500 lux). In 1982, Rosenthal, Lewy and al. reported an antidepressant effect of light exposure of a manic-depressive patient. The phototherapy was born. To treat the SAD, the most common procedure of phototherapy is to expose the subject during 2 hours early in the morning, between 06:00 and 09:00 AM. The subject is sitting before a light screen, he can work and has to fix the screen one time every minute. The most common side effects are headache, eyestrain, muscle pain. The ocular phototoxicity is controversed and it seems to be potentially dangerous if phototherapy is associated with tricyclic antidepressants, neuroleptics and other medication containing a tricyclic, heterocyclic or porphyrin ring system. Since this finding, many questions are asked about photoperiod and its effects in the human being. Lewy proposes for the winter depression the hypothesis of a phase delayed circadian rhythm, that can be treated by a morning light exposure. At the present time, many trials are going on to study the effects of phototherapy in other problems like insomnia, maladaptation to night work, jet lag and Alzheimer disease.

Schmitz, M., et al. (1997). "Sleep quality during alcohol withdrawal with bright light therapy." Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 21(6): 965-977.
	1. Alcohol withdrawal is a complex syndrome that ranges from anxiety, insomnia to delirium tremens. Common treatment is the application of sedative medication. Exposure to bright light in the daytime should advance the normal sleep/wake cycle and moreover it should improve the availability of man's adaptive behavior during alcohol withdrawal. 2. This pilot study describes bright light therapy (BL) during alcohol withdrawal in ten alcohol dependent patients (DSM-III-R: 291.80) without any sedative medication. BL (3000 Lux) was administered on day 3 of abstinence between 7.00-9.00 a.m. and 5.00-9.00 p.m. Total-sleep-polysomnography (recordings between 10.30 p.m.-6.00 a.m.) and self-rating scale were performed to compare intraindividual changes during three nights. After one adaptation night (immediately after alcohol withdrawal), one baseline night and one "BL-night" and one "post-BL night" were analysed. 3. At baseline, total sleep time and sleep efficiency were severely deteriorated, but tended to improve in the following nights after BL. Sleep onset latency showed a significant decline after BL. Stages 3 and 4 were reduced at baseline. Latencies to slow wave sleep were significantly shortened after BL. REM increased in the nights after BL. Subjective sleep quality improved after BL. Although the present results, bright light having a possible stabilizing effect on sleep maintenance and sleep architecture during acute alcohol withdrawal, the authors could only derive hypotheses for further ongoing controlled investigations using placebo light, to receive final verification.

Schmitz, M. M., et al. (1996). "Disrupted melatonin-secretion during alcohol withdrawal." Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 20(6): 983-995.
	1. The synthesis of the pineal hormone, melatonin, is under adrenergic control. The brain's rhythm generating system (suprachiasmatic nucleus and associated systems) which is synchronised by the light-dark cycle controls norepinephrine release from the sympathetic nerve terminal resulting in cAMP accumulation. Increased cAMP leads to induction of the rate-limiting enzyme, N-acetyltransferase and synthesis of melatonin. The pineal exhibits a circadian rhythm with highest blood levels of the hormone being present during the night. The circadian rhythm of melatonin production provides important time-of-day and time-of-year information and, as a result, this hormonal cycle drives other 24-hour rhythms as well as seasonal cycles of reproduction, at least in photoperiodic mammals. 2. Chronic alcoholics were withdrawn from alcohol during a continued period of 4 days and nights. Blood samples were drawn from an indwelling venous catheter and sleep was monitored with polysomnography. No medication was used. No alcohol intake was allowed after admission. Bright light treatment was applied during day 3 of the study. 3. During the 4 days of alcohol-withdrawal the night time melatonin-secretion was disrupted. More than 50% of the patients had a very low secretion (< 30 pg/ml) which did not normalize during the study period. Psychopathology, sleep quality and sleep architecture improved significantly. The melatonin secretion pattern showed low values throughout the study. This low melatonin secretion might reflect the long lasting toxic influence of alcohol on the biological clock and/or a direct inhibitory effect on pineal function. These are different effects, although interrelated. 4. Ethanol has a direct inhibitory effect on pineal melatonin synthesis. A well-recognized action of ethanol is its ability to permeate and perturb the structure of cell membranes and may be related to its lipophilic properties. The changes in membrane fluidity seem to last longer than the study period of 4 days.

Sedgwick, P. M. (1998). "Disorders of the sleep-wake cycle in adults." Postgrad Med J 74(869): 134-138.
	Adults have an intrinsic body clock which regulates a complex series of rhythms including sleep and wakefulness, fatigue and cognitive ability. This endogenous clock naturally runs more slowly than the solar day and is entrained to a 24-h rhythm primarily by the alternation of light and darkness. Jet lag, shift-work sleep disorder, and some of the chronic insomnias are caused by a temporal discrepancy of the body clock relative to the surrounding environment and social network. The underlying mechanisms and general management are described. Both bright light and melatonin therapy have potential in the management of these disorders. Traditionally, bright light therapy has been used to alleviate the depression associated with seasonal affective disorder. Melatonin has received much ill-formed publicity, it being claimed that it is a panacea and an 'antiageing' treatment. Both of these treatment approaches are reviewed.

Sekiguchi, H., et al. (2017). "Bright light therapy for sleep disturbance in dementia is most effective for mild to moderate Alzheimer's type dementia: a case series." Psychogeriatrics 17(5): 275-281.
	BACKGROUND: Sleep problems in people with dementia are common and place a high burden on caregivers. Although hypnotic agents are often used to treat sleep disturbances, their use is associated with a considerable number of high-risk side-effects such as daytime sleepiness, amnesia, and an increased frequency of falling. The administration of bright light therapy (BLT) in the morning was a non-pharmacological remedy that was expected to treat sleep disorders in patients with dementia by entraining the circadian rhythm to ameliorate disturbances to the normal sleep-wake cycle. However, there are some unsolved issues related to the application of BLT, including the types of dementia for which it is effective and its efficacy in the different stages of cognitive decline and dementia. Furthermore, a protocol for effective BLT has not yet been proposed. METHODS: In this study, we explored the efficacy of BLT in the treatment of 17 participants, including those with Alzheimer's type dementia (AD) (n = 8), vascular dementia (n = 4), and dementia with Lewy bodies (n = 5). Patients sat in front of the light box for 1 h/day from 0900 to 1000. The patients underwent treatment every day for 2 weeks. RESULTS: BLT led to the improvement of sleep disturbance in four participants, all of whom were AD patients. The four AD patients showed a shorter duration of illness and/or had mild to moderate AD. CONCLUSION: BLT could be an effective strategy for treating dementia patients, depending on their type and grade of their dementia. To confirm this hypothesis, it would be necessary to study a larger number of cases. Non-pharmacological therapies for sleep disorders should be emphasized as a safe form of treatment for patients with dementia.

Shang, B., et al. (2019). "Nonpharmacological interventions to improve sleep in nursing home residents: A systematic review." Geriatr Nurs 40(4): 405-416.
	Sleep disturbance is one of the most prevalent symptoms among elderly adults, especially those living in nursing homes. Sleep disturbance adversely affects the healthcare system as well as elderly adults' quality of life. Nonpharmacological interventions have shown promising results regarding improvements in sleep. This systematic review intended to identify the effects of nonpharmacological interventions on sleep quality and nighttime sleep among nursing home residents. We searched both English and Chinese databases through December 2018 and found 28 eligible studies describing five types of interventions: physical activity (n = 6), light therapy (n = 5), mind-body practices (n = 2), complementary and alternative therapy (n = 8), and multicomponent interventions (n = 7). Although the wide variety of interventions in each category limited the generalizability of the results, physical activity, mind-body practices, acupressure and chamomile extract intake demonstrated positive and promising impacts on sleep quality and nighttime sleep. Due to the small number of included trials, the results should be interpreted cautiously. Further higher-quality studies concerning nonpharmacological treatments are needed.

Short, C. A. and P. K. Carpenter (1998). "The treatment of sleep disorders in people with learning disabilities using light therapy." Int J Psychiatry Clin Pract 2(2): 143-145.
	Light therapy is a recognized treatment for sleep phase disorders in the general population. Exposure to natural light can be a powerful means of correcting people's sleep/wake pattern. Although sleep problems in the learning-disabled population are common, research is limited. Light therapy has not to our knowledge been studied in this population. We report the case of a man with profound learning disabilities and poor visual acuity who was successfully treated with natural light for chronic sleep disturbance. Light therapy is safe, cheap and relatively easy to carry out. It may prove helpful in subjects with learning disabilities who have sleep problems, even if they do not fulfill the criteria for a particular sleep disorder.

Shub, D., et al. (2009). "Non-pharmacologic treatment of insomnia in persons with dementia." Geriatrics 64(2): 22-26.
	The prevalence of insomnia increases with age and affects up to 35% of community-dwelling adults with dementia. Sleep disturbances and associated cognitive and behavioral symptoms in this patient population can be a significant contributor to morbidity, mortality, and caregiver burden. Despite the frequency with which sleep disorders are encountered in primary care, few evidence-based guidelines are available to guide physician treatment plans. Sedative-hypnotic medications are commonly prescribed but are associated with significant adverse effects and have limited efficacy data. Non-pharmacologic treatments can be safe and effective adjuncts or alternatives to medications but are often underused in clinical practice. This article reviews practical applications of modalities such as light therapy, exercise, and sleep-hygiene modification in treating insomnia in persons with dementia.

Sinclair, K. L., et al. (2014). "Randomized controlled trial of light therapy for fatigue following traumatic brain injury." Neurorehabil Neural Repair 28(4): 303-313.
	BACKGROUND: Fatigue is a common, persistent complaint following traumatic brain injury (TBI). Effective treatment is not well established. OBJECTIVE: .The current study aimed to investigate the efficacy of 4 weeks of light therapy for fatigue in patients with TBI. METHODS: We undertook a randomized, placebo-controlled study of 4-week, 45 min/morning, home-based treatment with short wavelength (blue) light therapy (λmax = 465 nm, 84.8 µW/cm(2), 39.5 lux, 1.74 × 10(14) photons/cm(2)/s) compared with yellow light therapy (λmax = 574 nm, 18.5 µW/cm(2), 68 lux, 1.21 × 10(12) photons/cm(2)/s) containing less photons in the short wavelength range and a no treatment control group (n = 10 per group) in patients with TBI who self-reported fatigue and/or sleep disturbance. Assessments of fatigue and secondary outcomes (self-reported daytime sleepiness, depression, sleep quality, and sustained attention) were conducted over 10 weeks at baseline (week -2), midway through and at the end of light therapy (weeks 2 and 4), and 4 weeks following cessation of light therapy (week 8). RESULTS: After controlling age, gender, and baseline depression, treatment with high-intensity blue light therapy resulted in reduced fatigue and daytime sleepiness during the treatment phase, with evidence of a trend toward baseline levels 4 weeks after treatment cessation. These changes were not observed with lower-intensity yellow light therapy or no treatment control conditions. There was also no significant treatment effect observed for self-reported depression or psychomotor vigilance performance. CONCLUSIONS: Blue light therapy appears to be effective in alleviating fatigue and daytime sleepiness following TBI and may offer a noninvasive, safe, and nonpharmacological alternative to current treatments.

Sit, D. K., et al. (2018). "Adjunctive Bright Light Therapy for Bipolar Depression: A Randomized Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Trial." Am J Psychiatry 175(2): 131-139.
	OBJECTIVE: Patients with bipolar disorder have recurrent major depression, residual mood symptoms, and limited treatment options. Building on promising pilot data, the authors conducted a 6-week randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial to investigate the efficacy of adjunctive bright light therapy at midday for bipolar depression. The aims were to determine remission rate, depression symptom level, and rate of mood polarity switch, as well as to explore sleep quality. METHOD: The study enrolled depressed adults with bipolar I or II disorder who were receiving stable dosages of antimanic medication (excluding patients with hypomania or mania, mixed symptoms, or rapid cycling). Patients were randomly assigned to treatment with either 7,000-lux bright white light or 50-lux dim red placebo light (N=23 for each group). Symptoms were assessed weekly with the Structured Interview Guide for the Hamilton Depression Scale With Atypical Depression Supplement (SIGH-ADS), the Mania Rating Scale, and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index. Remission was defined as having a SIGH-ADS score of 8 or less. RESULTS: At baseline, both groups had moderate depression and no hypomanic or manic symptoms. Compared with the placebo light group, the group treated with bright white light experienced a significantly higher remission rate (68.2% compared with 22.2%; adjusted odds ratio=12.6) at weeks 4-6 and significantly lower depression scores (9.2 [SD=6.6] compared with 14.9 [SD=9.2]; adjusted β=-5.91) at the endpoint visit. No mood polarity switches were observed. Sleep quality improved in both groups and did not differ significantly between them. CONCLUSIONS: The data from this study provide robust evidence that supports the efficacy of midday bright light therapy for bipolar depression.

Smilowska, K., et al. (2023). "The multimodal effect of circadian interventions in Parkinson's disease: A narrative review." Parkinsonism Relat Disord 110: 105309.
	BACKGROUND: The circadian system and its dysfunction in persons with Parkinson's disease (PwP) has a clear impact on both motor and non-motor symptoms. Examples include circadian patterns in motor disability, with worsening of symptoms throughout the day, but also the existence of similar patterns in non-motor symptoms. OBJECTIVE: In this narrative review, we discuss the role of the circadian system, we address the role of dopamine in this system, and we summarise the evidence that supports the use of circadian system treatments for motor and non-motor symptoms in PwP. METHODS: A systematic search in PubMed and Web of Science database was performed and the final search was performed in November 2021. We included articles whose primary aim was to investigate the effect of melatonin, melatonin agonists, and light therapy in PwP. RESULTS: In total 25 articles were retrieved. Of these, 12 were related to bright light therapy and 13 to melatonin or/and melatonin agonists. Most, but not all, studies showed that melatonin and melatonin agonists and light therapy induced improvements in measures of sleep, depression, motor function, and some also cognitive function and other non-motor symptoms. For some of these outcomes, including daytime sleepiness, depressive symptoms, and some motor symptoms, there is level 2 B evidence for the use of circadian treatments in PwP. CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with bright light therapy, exogenous melatonin and melatonin agonists seems to have not only positive effects on sleep quality and depression but also on motor function in PwP. Drawbacks in earlier work include the relatively small number of participants and the heterogeneity of outcome measures. Further large and well-designed trials are needed to address these shortcomings and to confirm or refute the possible merits of the circadian system as a treatment target in PwP.

Snitselaar, M. A., et al. (2017). "Sleep and Circadian Rhythmicity in Adult ADHD and the Effect of Stimulants." J Atten Disord 21(1): 14-26.
	OBJECTIVE: This review updates information on sleep and circadian rhythmicity in adult ADHD, especially circadian rhythmicity and the influence of stimulants. METHOD: Investigations into sleep, chronotype, and circadian rhythm in adult ADHD were searched in the Cochrane Library, Embase, Medline, and PsycInfo databases. RESULTS: ADHD in adults is associated with longer objective sleep latency, irrespective of insomnia complaints. Sleep maintenance is disturbed and waking up time is delayed. Adult ADHD is associated with increased eveningness, delayed dim light melatonin onset (DLMO), and later waking up time. Stimulant treatment induces delay of nonparametric circadian parameters, whereas light therapy (LT) induces shifts toward morningness, which is associated with a reduction of ADHD symptoms. CONCLUSION: Adult ADHD is associated with delayed circadian rhythmicity and analogous sleep characteristics, which are typical of a delayed sleep phase disorder. Stimulants induce delay of circadian rhythmicity.

Snyder, D. M., et al. (2008). "Inconsolable night-time awakening: beyond night terrors." J Dev Behav Pediatr 29(4): 311-314.
	Sophia is a 3-year-old girl who was brought to her pediatrician by her parents who were concerned about inconsolable night-time awakening. Her mother indicated that she has frequent (>6), early nocturnal awakenings accompanied by screaming and crying lasting up to 1 hour since her birth. These episodes increased in intensity and frequency in the past year since the birth of her brother. With a bedtime routine (a cup of water by bedside with a washcloth and touching mother's nose, chin, and cheeks), Sophia falls asleep easily; however, within 1 hour she awakes screaming and flailing unaware of her surroundings and unable to be comforted. There are no tonic-clonic movements. Prior interventions, including a sleep coach and "letting Sophia cry it out," did not change her sleep pattern. Sophia's mother reports that she needs to be on a specific daily routine including set times for awakening, activity, snacks, naps, and meals. Diversion from the routine and separation from her mother results in a tantrum (kicking, hitting, screaming, and inconsolability) often lasting more than 30 minutes. Sophia was born after an uncomplicated 37-week gestation. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia required readmission for 24 hours of phototherapy; serum bilirubin levels were performed daily for 3 weeks after discharge. At 6 weeks, daily episodes of screaming, inconsolability, forceful vomiting, and inability to sleep led to a diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux. Medication trials were not successful, but the symptoms resolved by 5 months. Formula intolerance and difficulty swallowing and chewing different textures of solid food occurred in the first year. Occupational therapy was of "no benefit"; Sophia was overwhelmed by the activity and took a long time to warm up to the therapist. Her texture aversion resolved by 2 years of age. She prefers one-on-one play and has minimal interactions with other children. She has met all her developmental milestones appropriately and has no other health issues. Sophia lives with her parents and infant brother. There is a maternal family history of insomnia and sleep walking and a paternal history of sleep walking. Her mother adheres to a strict daily schedule. Sleep deprivation, different parental child-rearing practices, social isolation, and lack of quality parent time were all identified by the mother as significant marital stressors. During the office visit, Sophia required 30 minutes to warm up and smile, and over 60 minutes before she spoke her first word. Physical examination was normal (including growth measurements) and the developmental examination was age-appropriate. Upon completion of the assessment, she was engaging, playful, and cooperative with the pediatrician.

Snyder, D. M., et al. (2010). "Inconsolable night-time awakening: beyond night terrors." J Dev Behav Pediatr 31(3 Suppl): S7-10.
	Sophia is a 3-year-old girl who was brought to her pediatrician by her parents who were concerned about inconsolable night-time awakening. Her mother indicated that she has frequent (>6), early nocturnal awakenings accompanied by screaming and crying lasting up to 1 hour since her birth. These episodes increased in intensity and frequency in the past year since the birth of her brother. With a bedtime routine (a cup of water by bedside with a washcloth and touching mother's nose, chin, and cheeks), Sophia falls asleep easily; however, within 1 hour she awakes screaming and flailing unaware of her surroundings and unable to be comforted. There are no tonic-clonic movements. Prior interventions, including a sleep coach and "letting Sophia cry it out," did not change her sleep pattern. Sophia's mother reports that she needs to be on a specific daily routine including set times for awakening, activity, snacks, naps, and meals. Diversion from the routine and separation from her mother results in a tantrum (kicking, hitting, screaming, and inconsolability) often lasting more than 30 minutes. Sophia was born after an uncomplicated 37-week gestation. Neonatal hyperbilirubinemia required readmission for 24 hours of phototherapy; serum bilirubin levels were performed daily for 3 weeks after discharge. At 6 weeks, daily episodes of screaming, inconsolability, forceful vomiting, and inability to sleep led to a diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux. Medication trials were not successful, but the symptoms resolved by 5 months. Formula intolerance and difficulty swallowing and chewing different textures of solid food occurred in the first year. Occupational therapy was of "no benefit"; Sophia was overwhelmed by the activity and took a long time to warm up to the therapist. Her texture aversion resolved by 2 years of age. She prefers one-on-one play and has minimal interactions with other children. She has met all her developmental milestones appropriately and has no other health issues. Sophia lives with her parents and infant brother. There is a maternal family history of insomnia and sleep walking and a paternal history of sleeping walking. Her mother adheres to a strict daily schedule. Sleep deprivation, differences parent child-rearing practices, social isolation, and lack of quality parent time were all identified by the mother as significant marital stressors. During the office visit, Sophia required 30 minutes to warm up and smile, and over 60 minutes before she spoke her first word. Physical examination was normal (including growth measurements) and the developmental examination was age-appropriate. Upon completion of the assessment, she was engaging, playful, and cooperative with the pediatrician.

Solov'eva, A. D. and E. Fishman (1996). "[The phototherapy of psycho-autonomic disorders]." Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova 96(3): 67-71.
	26 patients with psychovegetative disorders of neurotic origin (vegetative dystonia syndrome, hyperventilation syndrome, panic attacks, headache, insomnia, motivation disorders) were treated. Light therapy (LT) was carried out every day during 2 weeks. The light of 4500-5000 lux was applied during 1 hour (the distance-60 cm). As a result positive effect was revealed in 11 patients while there was no effect in 15 individuals. The positive effect was observed as a decrease of clinical manifestations. Patients with positive treatment results were characterised by short disease duration, weak hypothalamus dysfunction, astheno-depressive disorders prevalence. Negative effect of LT was observed in patients with longer duration of disease, more severe hypothalamic dysfunction together with anxious and astheno-hypochondriac syndrome. The conclusion a made that LT effect is associated with the character and the degree of psychovegetative disorders, but not with presence or absence of hypothalamic dysfunction.

Srinivasan, V., et al. (2011). "Therapeutic potential of melatonin and its analogs in Parkinson's disease: focus on sleep and neuroprotection." Ther Adv Neurol Disord 4(5): 297-317.
	Sleep disorders constitute major nonmotor features of Parkinson's disease (PD) that have a substantial effect on patients' quality of life and can be related to the progression of the neurodegenerative disease. They can also serve as preclinical markers for PD, as it is the case for rapid eye movement (REM)-associated sleep behavior disorder (RBD). Although the etiology of sleep disorders in PD remains undefined, the assessment of the components of the circadian system, including melatonin secretion, could give therapeutically valuable insight on their pathophysiopathology. Melatonin is a regulator of the sleep/wake cycle and also acts as an effective antioxidant and mitochondrial function protector. A reduction in the expression of melatonin MT(1) and MT(2) receptors has been documented in the substantia nigra of PD patients. The efficacy of melatonin for preventing neuronal cell death and for ameliorating PD symptoms has been demonstrated in animal models of PD employing neurotoxins. A small number of controlled trials indicate that melatonin is useful in treating disturbed sleep in PD, in particular RBD. Whether melatonin and the recently developed melatonergic agents (ramelteon, tasimelteon, agomelatine) have therapeutic potential in PD is also discussed.

Srisurapanont, K., et al. (2021). "Blue-wavelength light therapy for post-traumatic brain injury sleepiness, sleep disturbance, depression, and fatigue: A systematic review and network meta-analysis." PLoS One 16(2): e0246172.
	OBJECTIVE: This review aimed to determine the efficacy of blue-wavelength light therapy (BWLT) for post-traumatic brain injury (TBI) sleepiness, sleep disturbance, depression, and fatigue. METHODS: Pubmed, Scopus, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, Academic Search Complete, and CINAHL. Included trials were randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of BWLT in adults with a history of TBI. Outcomes of interest included sleepiness, sleep disturbance, depression, or fatigue. Two reviewers independently screened the searched items, selected the trials, extracted the data, and rating the quality of trials. We aggregated the data using a random-effect, frequentist network meta-analysis (NMA). RESULTS: We searched the databases on July 4, 2020. This review included four RCTs of 117 patients with a history of TBI who were randomized to received BWLT, amber light therapy (ALT), or no light therapy (NLT). Moderate-quality evidence revealed that: i) BWLT was significantly superior to NLT in reducing depression (SMD = 0.81, 95% CI = 0.20 to 1.43) ii) BWLT reduced fatigue at a significantly greater extent than NLT (SMD = 1.09, 95% CI = 0.41 to 1.76) and ALT (SMD = 1.00, 95% CI = 0.14 to 1.86). Low-quality evidence suggested that BWLT reduced depression at a greater extent than ALT (SMD = 0.57, 95% CI = 0.04 to 1.10). Low-quality evidence found that the dropout rates of those receiving BWLT and ALT were not significantly different (RR = 3.72, 95% CI = 0.65 to 21.34). CONCLUSION: Moderate-quality evidence suggests that BWLT may be useful for post-TBI depression and fatigue.

Srisurapanont, K., et al. (2022). "Efficacy and acceptability of blue-wavelength light therapy for post-TBI behavioral symptoms: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials." PLoS One 17(10): e0274025.
	OBJECTIVE: Behavioral symptoms are common after traumatic brain injury (TBI), but their treatments remain unsatisfactory. This systematic review and meta-analysis compared the efficacy and acceptability between blue-wavelength light therapy (BWLT) and long-wavelength/no light therapy (LW/NLT) for post-TBI sleepiness, sleep disturbance, depressive symptoms, and fatigue. METHODS: This study included randomized controlled trials comparing the effects of BWLT and LW/NLT on post-TBI sleepiness, sleep disturbance, depression, or fatigue. We searched Pubmed, Embase, CINAHL, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled of Trials on April 13, 2022. The revised tool for assessing the risk of bias in randomized trials was applied. We performed a frequentist pairwise meta-analysis using a random-effects model. RESULTS: Of 233 retrieved records, six trials (N = 278) were included in this meta-analysis. TBIs ranged from mild to severe, and the interventions were administered for a median of 35 days. Most trials delivered light therapy via lightboxes. Three trials had a high risk of bias. BWLT was significantly superior to LW/NLT in reducing sleep disturbance (5 trials; SMD = -0.63; 95% CI = -1.21 to -0.05; p = 0.03; I2 = 61%) and depressive symptoms (4 trials; SMD = -1.00; 95% CI = -1.62 to -0.38; p < 0.01; I2 = 56%). There were trends that BWLT was superior to LW/NLT in reducing sleepiness (6 trials; SMD = -0.92; 95% CI = -1.84 to 0.00; p = 0.05; I2 = 88%) and fatigue (4 trials; SMD = -1.44; 95% CI = -2.95 to 0.08; p = 0.06; I2 = 91%). All-cause dropout rates were not significantly different between groups. CONCLUSION: Limited and heterogenous evidence suggests that short-term BWLT is well accepted, has a large treatment effect on post-TBI depressive symptoms, and may have a moderate treatment effect on post-TBI sleep disturbance.

Starreveld, D. E. J., et al. (2021). "Light Therapy for Cancer-Related Fatigue in (Non-)Hodgkin Lymphoma Survivors: Results of a Randomized Controlled Trial." Cancers (Basel) 13(19).
	PURPOSE: To evaluate the short- and long-term effects of light therapy on fatigue (primary outcome) and sleep quality, depression, anxiety, quality of life, and circadian rhythms (secondary outcomes) in survivors of (non-)Hodgkin lymphoma presenting with chronic cancer-related fatigue. METHODS: We randomly assigned 166 survivors (mean survival 13 years) to a bright white light intervention (BWL) or dim white light comparison (DWL) group. Measurements were completed at baseline (T0), post-intervention (T1), at three (T2), and nine (T3) months follow-up. A mixed-effect modeling approach was used to compare linear and non-linear effects of time between groups. RESULTS: There were no significant differences between BWL and DWL in the reduction in fatigue over time. Both BWL and DWL significantly (p < 0.001) improved fatigue levels during the intervention followed by a slight reduction in this effect during follow-up (ES(T0-T1) = -0.71; ES(T1-T3) = 0.15). Similar results were found for depression, sleep quality, and some aspects of quality of life. Light therapy had no effect on circadian rhythms. CONCLUSIONS: BWL was not superior in reducing fatigue compared to DWL in HL and DLBCL survivors. Remarkably, the total sample showed clinically relevant and persistent improvements on fatigue not commonly seen in longitudinal observational studies in these survivors.

Starreveld, D. E. J., et al. (2018). "Light therapy as a treatment of cancer-related fatigue in (non-)Hodgkin lymphoma survivors (SPARKLE trial): study protocol of a multicenter randomized controlled trial." BMC Cancer 18(1): 880.
	BACKGROUND: Cancer related fatigue (CRF) is one of the most prevalent and distressing long-term complaints reported by (non-) Hodgkin survivors. To date there has been no standard treatment for CRF in this population. A novel and promising approach to treat CRF is exposure to bright white light therapy. Yet, large scale randomized controlled trials testing its efficacy in these patients and research on potential mechanisms is lacking. The objective of the current study is to investigate the efficacy of light therapy as a treatment for CRF and to explore potential mechanisms. METHODS/DESIGN: In a multicenter, randomized controlled trial we are evaluating the efficacy of two intensities of light therapy in reducing CRF complaints and restrictions caused by CRF in survivors of Hodgkin lymphoma or diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Secondary outcomes include sleep quality, depression, anxiety, quality of life, cognitive complaints, cancer worries, fatigue catastrophizing, self-efficacy to handle fatigue, biological circadian rhythms of melatonin, cortisol and activity, and biomarkers of inflammation. We will recruit 128 survivors, with fatigue complaints, from academic and general hospitals. Survivors are randomized to either an intervention (exposure to bright white light) or a comparison group (exposure to dim white light). The longitudinal design includes four measurement points at baseline (T0), post-intervention at 3.5 weeks (T1), 3 months post-intervention (T2) and 9 months post-intervention (T3). Each measurement point includes self-reported questionnaires and actigraphy (10 days). T0 and T1 measurements also include collection of blood and saliva samples. DISCUSSION: Light therapy has the potential to be an effective treatment for CRF in cancer survivors. This study will provide insights on its efficacy and potential mechanisms. If proven to be effective, light therapy will provide an easy to deliver, low-cost and low-burden intervention, introducing a new era in the treatment of CRF. TRIAL REGISTRATION: The study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov on August 8th 2017( NCT03242902 ).

Stauder, M., et al. (2022). "Relationships of self-reported and objective measures of sleep, sleepiness, and sleep quality in Parkinson's disease." Parkinsonism Relat Disord 101: 57-61.
	INTRODUCTION: Disrupted sleep and excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) are common and disabling symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD). The relationships between subjective and objective assessments of sleep and sleepiness in PD are not well established. We aimed to examine the relationships between self-reported (subjective) and objective assessments of sleep and sleepiness in PD. METHODS: Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS), Pittsburg Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), Parkinson's Disease Sleep Scale (PDSS), sleep diaries, and overnight polysomnography (PSG) with next-morning multiple sleep latency testing (MSLT) were collected from 27 individuals with PD and EDS who participated in a clinical trial of light therapy for EDS in PD. RESULTS: No significant correlations were found between measures of EDS and night-time sleep quality and quantity. PDSS was correlated with PSQI. PDSS and PSQI had significant relationships with multiple metrics derived from sleep diaries, including sleep latency, quality, and ease of falling asleep. Several PSG-derived sleep metrics correlated well with sleep diary metrics. CONCLUSIONS: There is a poor correlation between metrics used to assess sleep and sleepiness in PD. A sleep diary may be a valuable tool for this purpose. Accurate clinical and research assessment and monitoring require refinement of existing and development of novel methods for measuring sleep and sleepiness in PD.

Stefani, A. and B. Högl (2021). "Sleep Disorders in Parkinson Disease." Sleep Med Clin 16(2): 323-334.
	Sleep disorders in Parkinson disease have attracted the attention of clinicians and researchers for decades. Recently, major advances in their clinical characterization, polysomnographic description, pathophysiologic understanding, and treatment took place. Parkinson disease encompasses the whole spectrum of sleep medicine: every category of sleep disorder can be observed in these patients. Video polysomnography frequently is indicated, sometimes followed by multiple sleep latency/maintenance of wakefulness tests. Additional studies may include actigraphy, cardiorespiratory polygraphy, and dim light melatonin assessment. Treatment needs to be specific to the underlying sleep disorder and can include medications and nondrug treatments, for example, behavioral therapy and light therapy.

Strober, B. E., et al. (2012). "Sleep quality and other patient-reported outcomes improve after patients with psoriasis with suboptimal response to other systemic therapies are switched to adalimumab: results from PROGRESS, an open-label Phase IIIB trial." Br J Dermatol 167(6): 1374-1381.
	BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is associated with poor health-related quality of life, including sleep impairment. OBJECTIVE: To assess the extent of sleep impairment, the effect of adalimumab on sleep and other patient-reported outcomes, and correlations between changes in these outcomes and sleep quality in patients with psoriasis. METHODS: Patients in the 16-week, open-label, Phase IIIb PROGRESS trial had chronic plaque psoriasis and suboptimal response to prior therapy (etanercept, methotrexate or narrowband ultraviolet B phototherapy). Adalimumab was self-injected subcutaneously (80 mg at week 0, then 40 mg every other week from week 1). The focus for this analysis was the Medical Outcomes Study Sleep Scale. Other patient-reported outcomes included the Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI), Psoriasis Area and Severity Index (PASI), Physician's Global Assessment, a visual analogue scale for psoriasis/psoriatic arthritis (PsA) pain, and the Work Productivity and Activity Index Questionnaire-Specific Health Problems. RESULTS: Patients with psoriasis had impaired sleep at baseline. The degree of sleep impairment was significantly associated with the extent of work productivity for all sleep measures and, for some sleep measures, was associated with DLQI impairment, clinical severity measured by PASI, the presence of PsA, and depression. Adalimumab treatment significantly improved sleep quality by 15% from baseline, as well as DLQI score, pain and work productivity. The improvement in sleep was partially explained (R(2 ) = 0·16, P < 0·001) by improvements in the objectively measured psoriasis signs in PASI. CONCLUSIONS: Adalimumab treatment improved sleep outcomes and other patient-reported outcomes including health-related quality of life, work productivity, daily activity and disease-related pain.

Suhner, A. G., et al. (2002). "Failure of timed bright light exposure to alleviate age-related sleep maintenance insomnia." J Am Geriatr Soc 50(4): 617-623.
	OBJECTIVES: To determine whether a twice-weekly maintenance schedule of evening bright light exposure is effective in alleviating sleep maintenance insomnia on a long-term basis, after the establishment of a more favorable phase relationship between the core body temperature (CBT) rhythm and sleep. DESIGN: Subjects underwent light treatment while living at home. Eleven to 13 consecutive days of acute light treatment (active) were followed by a 3-month maintenance light treatment period (active or control). Subjects completed five laboratory sessions: before and after the acute phase and once a month during the maintenance period. SETTING: Sleep laboratory and subjects' homes. PARTICIPANTS: Fifteen older subjects (seven women, eight men; aged 63-84) with chronic (>1 year) complaints of sleep maintenance insomnia. INTERVENTIONS: During the acute phase, all participants were exposed to evening bright light (approximately 9:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.;>4,000 lux). During the maintenance phase, light treatment was reduced to a twice-weekly schedule, in which the active group received bright light from approximately 9:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. and the control group received bright light from 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. MEASUREMENTS: During each laboratory session, polysomnographic sleep and CBT were measured. RESULTS: Bright light exposure during the acute treatment resulted in an average phase delay in the temperature rhythm (Tmin) of 94 minutes. Sleep quality was not improved. No significant differences between active and control subjects were found during the maintenance phase; in both groups, Tmin gradually reverted to the baseline phase position, and sleep efficiency remained unchanged. CONCLUSIONS: Although a significant phase shift in CBT was achieved during the acute treatment phase, no improvement in sleep quality was observed. Twice-weekly light exposure was not effective in maintaining the circadian phase shift over the subsequent 3 months. Issues of compliance and alternate etiologies for the sleep maintenance insomnia are discussed.

Sun, S. Y. and G. H. Chen (2022). "Treatment of Circadian Rhythm Sleep-Wake Disorders." Curr Neuropharmacol 20(6): 1022-1034.
	Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders (CRSWDs) are a distinct class of sleep disorders caused by alterations to the circadian time-keeping system, its entrainment mechanisms, or a mismatch between the endogenous circadian rhythm and the external environment. The main clinical manifestations are insomnia and excessive daytime sleepiness that often lead to clinically meaningful distress or cause mental, physical, social, occupational, educational, or other functional impairment. CRSWDs are easily mistaken for insomnia or early waking up, resulting in inappropriate treatment. CRSWDs can be roughly divided into two categories, namely, intrinsic CRSWDs, in which sleep disturbances are caused by alterations to the endogenous circadian rhythm system due to chronic changes in the regulation or capture mechanism of the biological clock, and extrinsic circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders, in which sleep disorders, such as jet lag or shift-work disorder, result from environmental changes that cause a mismatch between sleep-wakefulness times and internal circadian rhythms. Sleep diaries, actigraphy, and determination of day and night phase markers (dim light melatonin onset and core body temperature minimum) have all become routine diagnostic methods for CRSWDs. Common treatments for CRSWD currently include sleep health education, time therapy, light therapy, melatonin, and hypnotic drug therapy. Here, we review the progress in the epidemiology, etiology, diagnostic evaluation, diagnostic criteria, and treatment of intrinsic CRSWD, with emphasis on the latter, in the hope of bolstering the clinical diagnosis and treatment of CRSWDs.

Sun, W., et al. (2022). "Efficacy and Safety of Light Therapy as a Home Treatment for Motor and Non-Motor Symptoms of Parkinson Disease: A Meta-Analysis." Med Sci Monit 28: e935074.
	BACKGROUND Non-visual effects of the retina have been increasingly confirmed in developing Parkinson disease (PD). Light therapy (LT) has been proven to be an effective non-pharmacotherapy for improving the prognosis of PD, but the pathway of action is unclear, and there is a lack of a unified and standardized LT regimen. We aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of various LT measures in improving motor and non-motor symptoms in patients with idiopathic PD via a meta-analysis. MATERIAL AND METHODS CENTRAL, EMBASE, CINAHL, PEDro, and PubMed were searched for randomized controlled trials (RCTs) investigating the efficacy of LT for PD. Cochrane's Risk of bias tool and the GRADE approach were used to assess evidence quality. A meta-analysis and subgroup analyses evaluated the differences in efficacy produced by the different LT protocols. Trial sequential analysis (TSA) verified the analyses outcome and quantified the statistical relevance of the data.[color=#0e101a] [/color] RESULTS Patients receiving LT had significantly better scores for motor function (MD=-4.68, 95% Cl -8.25 to -1.12, P=0.01) compared with the control group exposed to dim-red light. In addition, in terms of non-motor symptoms, depression (SMD=-0.27, 95% Cl -0.52 to -0.02, P=0.04) and sleep disturbance-related scores (MD=3.45, 95% Cl 0.12 to 6.78, P=0.04) similarly showed significant optimization after receiving LT. CONCLUSIONS The results of this meta-analysis show strong evidence that LT has significant efficacy on motor and non-motor function in PD patients.

Sutherland, D., et al. (2004). "The use of light therapy to lower agitation in people with dementia." Nurs Times 100(45): 32-34.
	Agitation and sleep disturbance are problematic for people with dementia and their carers, and have been linked to disrupted circadian rhythms caused by a lack of exposure to light. Bright light therapy (BLT) offers a powerful and cost-effective alternative to pharmacological options, and can be easily incorporated into care routines. This article describes practical issues faced when implementing light therapy in a nursing home setting, and attempts to address existing perceptions about its effectiveness.

Swanson, L. M. and G. B. Raglan (2023). "Circadian Interventions as Adjunctive Therapies to Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia." Sleep Med Clin 18(1): 21-30.
	The circadian system plays a key role in the sleep-wake cycle. A mismatch between the behavioral timing of sleep and the circadian timing of sleepiness/alertness can contribute to insomnia. Patients who report primarily difficulty falling asleep or early morning awakenings may benefit from circadian interventions administered adjunctively to cognitive-behavioral therapy for insomnia. Specific circadian interventions that clinicians may consider include bright light therapy, scheduled dim light, blue-blocking glasses, and melatonin. Implementation of these interventions differs depending on the patient's insomnia subtype. Further, careful attention must be paid to the timing of these interventions to ensure they are administered correctly.

Swarna, S. S., et al. (2019). "Pruritus Associated With Chronic Kidney Disease: A Comprehensive Literature Review." Cureus 11(7): e5256.
	The prevalence of pruritus in chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients has varied over the years, and some studies suggest the prevalence may be coming down with more effective dialysis. Chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus (CKD-aP), previously called uremic pruritus, is a distressing symptom experienced by patients with mainly advanced chronic kidney disease. CKD-aP is associated with poor quality of life, depression, anxiety, sleep disturbance, and increased mortality. The incidence of CKD-aP is decreasing given improvements in dialysis treatments, but approximately 40% of patients with end-stage renal disease experience CKD-aP. While the pathogenesis of CKD-aP is not well understood, the interaction between non-myelinated C fibers and dermal mast cells plays an important role in precipitation and sensory stimulation. Other causes of CKD-aP include metabolic abnormalities such as abnormal serum calcium, parathyroid, and phosphate levels; an imbalance in opiate receptors is also an important factor. CKD-aP usually presents as large symmetric reddened areas of skin, often at night. Managing CKD-aP is a challenge. Research in this area is difficult because most studies are not comparable given their small group samples, study designs, and lack of standardized study measures. The most commonly used treatment is a combination of narrow-band ultraviolet B phototherapy and a μ-opioid receptor antagonist such as naltrexone.

Tagaya, H. (2009). "[Circadian rhythm sleep disorders]." Nihon Rinsho 67(8): 1501-1506.
	Circadian system is master clock of daily sleep-wake cycle. It is able to create periodic activity with a period of almost 24 hours autonomously, and is able to entrain itself to day-night cycle of environment using with daily change of sunlight as time clue. Circadian rhythm sleep disorders (CRSDs) are defined as sleep disorders caused by misalignment between internal circadian clock and social schedule. Insomnia, hypersomnia, headache or intestinal symptoms are common complaints of CRSD patients, and these symptoms may deteriorate patients' social function. Jet lag disorder and shift work disorder are originated by acute shift of social schedule that exceed ability of circadian entrainment. However, pathophysiology of other CRSDs are not fully cleared. Treatments of CRSDs aim to facilitate circadian entrainment to desirable schedule with time clues at proper timing of circadian system. Bright light therapy (BLT) and melatonin administration are effective. Hypnotic administration is not effective in most cases.

Tagaya, H., et al. (2015). "[Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder (circadian rhythm sleep disorder)]." Nihon Rinsho 73(6): 942-948.
	The role of the circadian system is forecasting the daily and yearly change of environment. Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorder (CRSWD) is defined as physical and social impairment caused by misalignment between circadian rhythm and desirable social schedule. CRSWDs are induced by medical or environmental factors as well as dysfunctions of circadian system. Clinicians should be aware that sleep-inducing medications, restless legs syndrome, delirium and less obedience to social schedule are frequent cause of CRSWD among elderly. Bright light therapy and orally administered small dose of melatonin or melatonin agonist at proper circadian phase are recommended treatments. Sleep-inducing medications should not be considered as CRSWD treatments, especially to elderly.

Takimoto, M., et al. (2005). "Daily expression of clock genes in whole blood cells in healthy subjects and a patient with circadian rhythm sleep disorder." Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 289(5): R1273-1279.
	In recent years, circadian rhythm sleep disorders in humans have been increasing. Clinical features characteristic of this disorder are well known, but the specific causes remain unknown. However, various derangements of circadian expression of the clock gene are a probable cause of this disease. We have attempted to elucidate the relationship between the expression of the clock genes in whole blood cells and the clinical features characteristic of this disorder. In this study, we indicate the daily expression of clock genes period (Per) 1, 2, 3, Bmal1, and Clock in whole blood cells in 12 healthy male subjects. The peak phase of Per1, Per2, and Per3 appeared in the early morning, whereas that of Bmal1 and Clock appeared in the midnight hours. Furthermore, in one patient case with circadian rhythm sleep disorder, we observed variations of the peak phase in clock genes by treatments such as light therapy, exercise therapy, and medicinal therapy. This study suggested that the monitoring of human clock genes in whole blood cells, which may be functionally important for the molecular control of the circadian pacemaker as well as in suprachiasmatic nucleus, might be useful to evaluate internal synchronization.

Tan, J. S. I., et al. (2022). "Light therapy for sleep disturbances in older adults with dementia: a systematic review, meta-analysis and meta-regression." Sleep Med 90: 153-166.
	BACKGROUND: Sleep disturbances in older adults with dementia are common. Light therapy may help in regulating their sleep or wake cycle. However, data in the literature on the effectiveness of light therapy for the people with the said condition remain inconclusive. Thus, further research is warranted. OBJECTIVES: This review aims to synthesize the best available evidence on the effectiveness of light therapy in reducing sleep disturbances among older adults with dementia. METHODS: PubMed, Embase, Scopus, CINAHL, Cochrane Library, ALOIS, PsycInfo, Web of Science, ProQuest, OpenGrey, various trial registries and different journals specializing on sleep were searched without limitations on the year of publication. Cochrane's Risk of Bias Tool version 1 and GRADE criteria were used to assess risk of bias and certainty of evidence, respectively. Meta-analysis and meta-regression analyses were conducted using Stata software. RESULTS: A total of 18 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) involving 1012 older persons with dementia were included. The meta-analysis revealed that light therapy significantly reduced night-time awakenings (p = 0.04), enhanced sleep quality (p = 0.01) and increased relative amplitude (p = 0.01) with a small to medium effect (g = 0.26-0.43). Subgroup analyses showed that studies conducted in the Western Pacific region had a larger effect size on sleep duration and efficiency than those conducted in other regions. Univariate random-effects meta-regression revealed that sample size was a significant covariate for the effect size of sleep duration and sleep efficiency. CONCLUSION: This study found that the majority of outcomes had a low level of certainty. Therefore, additional well-designed and large-scale trials must be conducted to achieve a more definitive conclusion.

Terman, M., et al. (1996). "Predictors of response and nonresponse to light treatment for winter depression." Am J Psychiatry 153(11): 1423-1429.
	OBJECTIVE: The authors' goal was to determine whether the pattern and severity of depressive symptoms predict response to light treatment for seasonal affective disorder. METHOD: Subjects with winter depression (N = 103) were given bright light treatment. Seventy-one were classified as responders, 15 as nonresponders, and 17 as partial responders. Using depression rating scale data and correlational and multivariate analysis, the authors sought predictors of response in baseline symptom and scale scores. RESULTS: Responders were characterized by atypical symptoms, especially hypersomnia, afternoon or evening slump, reverse diurnal variation (evenings worse), and carbohydrate craving. By contrast, nonresponders were characterized mainly by melancholic symptoms, retardation, suicidality, depersonalization, typical diurnal variation (mornings worse), anxiety, early and late insomnia, appetite loss, and guilt. The ratio of atypical to classical symptoms of depression, rather than severity per se, best predicted treatment outcome for the group as a whole. Pretreatment expectations were positively correlated with improvement on the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale but not on a supplementary scale of atypical symptoms. CONCLUSIONS: Light-responsive seasonal affective disorder is distinguished by a dominant atypical symptom profile closely associated with depressed mood. Nonresponders from a clinically distinct group with melancholic features. The patient's symptom profile, therefore, should be considered when diagnosing seasonal affective disorder and selecting treatment.

Terman, M., et al. (1998). "Chronic fatigue syndrome and seasonal affective disorder: comorbidity, diagnostic overlap, and implications for treatment." Am J Med 105(3a): 115s-124s.
	This study aimed to determine symptom patterns in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), in summer and winter. Comparison data for patients with seasonal affective disorder (SAD) were used to evaluate seasonal variation in mood and behavior, atypical neurovegetative symptoms characteristic of SAD, and somatic symptoms characteristic of CFS. Rating scale questionnaires were mailed to patients previously diagnosed with CFS. Instruments included the Personal Inventory for Depression and SAD (PIDS) and the Systematic Assessment for Treatment Emergent Effects (SAFTEE), which catalogs the current severity of a wide range of somatic, behavioral, and affective symptoms. Data sets from 110 CFS patients matched across seasons were entered into the analysis. Symptoms that conform with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) case definition of CFS were rated as moderate to very severe during the winter months by varying proportions of patients (from 43% for lymph node pain or enlargement, to 79% for muscle, joint, or bone pain). Fatigue was reported by 92%. Prominent affective symptoms included irritability (55%), depressed mood (52%), and anxiety (51%). Retrospective monthly ratings of mood, social activity, energy, sleep duration, amount eaten, and weight change showed a coherent pattern of winter worsening. Of patients with consistent summer and winter ratings (n = 73), 37% showed high global seasonality scores (GSS) > or = 10. About half this group reported symptoms indicative of major depressive disorder, which was strongly associated with high seasonality. Hierarchical cluster analysis of wintertime symptoms revealed 2 distinct clinical profiles among CFS patients: (a) those with high seasonality, for whom depressed mood clustered with atypical neurovegetative symptoms of hypersomnia and hyperphagia, as is seen in SAD; and (b) those with low seasonality, who showed a primary clustering of classic CFS symptoms (fatigue, aches, cognitive disturbance), with depressed mood most closely associated with irritability, insomnia, and anxiety. It appears that a subgroup of patients with CFS shows seasonal variation in symptoms resembling those of SAD, with winter exacerbation. Light therapy may provide patients with CFS an effective treatment alternative or adjunct to antidepressant drugs.

Terman, M. and J. S. Terman (1999). "Bright light therapy: side effects and benefits across the symptom spectrum." J Clin Psychiatry 60(11): 799-808; quiz 809.
	BACKGROUND: Bright light therapy has been established for treatment of winter depression, or seasonal affective disorder (SAD). Analysis of side effects most often have focused on a narrow set of suspected symptoms, based on clinical observation (e.g., headache, eyestrain, nausea, insomnia, and hyperactivity). This study broadens the purview to a set of 88 physical and subjective symptoms that might emerge, remit, or remain unchanged relative to baseline, thus reducing bias toward assessment of presumed side effects. METHOD: Eighty-three patients with SAD (DSM-III-R criteria for mood disorders with seasonal pattern [winter type] and National Institute of Mental Health criteria for SAD) received bright light therapy at 10,000 lux for 30 minutes daily in the morning or evening for 10 to 14 days. They completed a questionnaire (Systematic Assessment for Treatment Emergent Effects), rating symptom severity before and after treatment. Results were compared for morning or evening treatment and for responders and nonresponders. RESULTS: Several side effects emerged--mostly mildly--including jumpiness/jitteriness (8.8%), headache (8.4%), and nausea (15.9%), mirroring findings of past studies with a less inclusive scope. In most cases, remission rate equalled or exceeded emergence rate. Several nondepressive symptoms also showed large improvement, including poor vision and skin rash/itch/irritation. Being overactive/excited/elated showed greater emergence under morning light and greater remission under evening light. Emergence of nausea was greater than remission in responders. CONCLUSION: The dominant effect of light treatment was improvement in bothersome symptoms. Although patients should be advised of side effects and guided in dose manipulations to reduce them, attention also should be drawn to the substantial benefit-to-risk ratio. Improvement of symptoms outside the depressive cluster, seen in both responders and nonresponders, may point to new therapeutic uses of light therapy.

Thorpy, M. J. (2010). "Managing the patient with shift-work disorder." J Fam Pract 59(1 Suppl): S24-31.
	Behavioral measures, eg, exercise and improved sleep hygiene, can enhance sleep quality and combat insomnia and excessive sleepiness (ES) in shift workers and individuals with shift-work disorder (SWD). Napping before a shift followed by consumption of a caffeinated drink and, if appropriate, scheduled naps at work, may improve ES in patients with SWD. Use of bright light therapy to partially re-entrain the circadian clock should be explored for all night-shift workers-particularly those with SWD. The wakefulness-promoting agents armodafinil and modafinil are FDA approved for the treatment of ES in patients with SWD. Alongside nonpharmacologic interventions, they can be included in a comprehensive management plan for SWD. Melatonin or other sleep-promoting agents may help shift workers achieve sleep during required rest periods and when adjusting to night-shift work; studies are needed in patients with SWD to better evaluate the utility of these agents in this population.

Trotti, L. M. and D. L. Bliwise (2014). "Treatment of the sleep disorders associated with Parkinson's disease." Neurotherapeutics 11(1): 68-77.
	Sleep disorders are common in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), and preliminary work has suggested viable treatment options for many of these disorders. For rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, melatonin and clonazepam are most commonly used, while rivastigmine might be a useful option in patients whose behaviors are refractory to the former. Optimal treatments for insomnia in PD have yet to be determined, but preliminary evidence suggests that cognitive-behavioral therapy, light therapy, eszopiclone, donepezil, and melatonin might be beneficial. Use of the wake-promoting agent modafinil results in significant improvement in subjective measures of excessive daytime sleepiness, but not of fatigue. Optimal treatment of restless legs syndrome and obstructive sleep apnea in PD are not yet established, although a trial of continuous positive airway pressure for sleep apnea was recently completed in PD patients. In those patients with early morning motor dysfunction and disrupted sleep, the rotigotine patch provides significant benefit.

Turco, M., et al. (2018). "Morning Bright Light Treatment for Sleep-Wake Disturbances in Primary Biliary Cholangitis: A Pilot Study." Front Physiol 9: 1530.
	Patients with Primary Biliary Cholangitis (PBC) exhibit delayed sleep-wake habits, disturbed night sleep and daytime sleepiness/fatigue. Such combination of symptoms is reminiscent of delayed sleep-wake phase disorder (DSPD), which benefits from morning light treatment. The aim of the present pilot study was to test the effect of morning light treatment in a group of 13 well-characterized patients with PBC [all females; (mean ± SD) 53 ± 10 years]. Six healthy individuals (4 females, 57 ± 14 years) and 7 patients with cirrhosis (1 female, 57 ± 12 years) served as controls and diseased controls, respectively. At baseline, all participants underwent an assessment of quality of life, diurnal preference, sleep quality/timing (subjective plus actigraphy), daytime sleepiness, and urinary 6-sulphatoxymelatonin (aMT6s) rhythmicity. Then they underwent a 15-day course of morning bright light treatment, immediately after getting up (light box, 10,000 lux, 45 min) whilst monitoring sleep-wake patterns and aMT6s rhythmicity. At baseline, both patients with PBC and patients with cirrhosis had significantly worse subjective sleep quality compared to controls. In patients with PBC, light treatment resulted in an improvement in subjective sleep quality and a reduction in daytime sleepiness. In addition, both their sleep onset and get-up time were significantly advanced. Finally, the robustness of aMT6s rhythmicity (i.e., strength of the cosinor fit) increased after light administration but post-hoc comparisons were not significant in any of the groups. In conclusion, a brief course of morning bright light treatment had positive effects on subjective sleep quality, daytime sleepiness, and sleep timing in patients with PBC. This unobtrusive, side-effect free, non-pharmacological treatment is worthy of further study.

Urrestarazu, E. and J. Iriarte (2016). "Clinical management of sleep disturbances in Alzheimer's disease: current and emerging strategies." Nat Sci Sleep 8: 21-33.
	Sleep and circadian disorders in Alzheimer's disease (AD) are more frequent than in the general population and appear early in the course of the disease. Quality of sleep and quality of life are parallel in these patients, and such disorders also represent a heavy burden for caregivers. Although alterations in melatonin and hypocretins (orexins) seem to play a key role in the origin of these disturbances, the etiology of these disorders is multifactorial, including many factors such as environment, behavior, treatments, and comorbidities, among others. A comprehensive evaluation of sleep in each patient is essential in the design of the treatment that includes nonpharmacological and pharmacological approaches. One particularly interesting point is the possibility of a role of sleep disorders in the pathogenesis of AD, raising the possibility that treating the sleep disorder may alter the course of the disease. In this review, we present an update on the role of sleep disorders in AD, the bidirectional influence of sleep problems and AD, and treatment options. Behavioral measures, bright light therapy (BLT), melatonin, and other drugs are likely well known and correctly managed by the physicians in charge of these patients. In spite of the multiple treatments used, evidence of efficacy is scarce and more randomized double-blind placebo-controlled studies are needed. Future directions for treatment are the establishment of BLT protocols and the development of drugs with new mechanisms of action, especially hypocretin receptor antagonists, melatonin receptor agonists, and molecules that modulate the circadian clock.

Usui, A., et al. (2000). "Bright light treatment for night-time insomnia and daytime sleepiness in elderly people: comparison with a short-acting hypnotic." Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 54(3): 374-376.
	Night-time bright light (BL) treatment and triazolam (0.125 mg/day) were given to three healthy elderly people in a cross-over design. They kept a daytime sleepiness test and a sleep log, and their wrist-activity was monitored simultaneously. Subjectively, BL increased daytime sleepiness and naps, and decreased night-time sleep. Triazolam decreased daytime sleepiness and naps, and increased night-time sleep. Actigraphic night-time sleep and naps on the first day were similar to these results. However, on the fourth day night-time insomnia induced by BL had recovered, and naps were shorter than the baseline. Triazolam increased actigraphic naps as the days passed.

van Andel, E., et al. (2022). "Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Delayed Sleep Phase Syndrome in Adults: A Randomized Clinical Trial on the Effects of Chronotherapy on Sleep." J Biol Rhythms 37(6): 673-689.
	Delayed sleep phase syndrome (DSPS) is the most common sleep disturbance in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). We previously showed that chronotherapy with melatonin effectively advanced the dim-light melatonin onset (DLMO), a biomarker for the internal circadian rhythm, by 1.5 h and reduced ADHD symptoms by 14%. Melatonin combined with bright light therapy (BLT) advanced the DLMO by 2 h, but did not affect ADHD symptoms. This article explores whether sleep times advanced along with DLMO, leading to longer sleep duration and better sleep in general, which might explain the working mechanism behind the reduction in ADHD symptoms after treatment with melatonin. This article presents exploratory secondary analysis on objective and self-reported sleep characteristics from a three-armed double-blind randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial (RCT), which included 49 adults (18-55 years) with ADHD and DSPS. Participants were randomized to receive sleep education and 3 weeks of (1) 0.5 mg/day placebo, (2) 0.5 mg/day melatonin, or (3) 0.5 mg/day melatonin plus 30 min of bright light therapy (BLT) between 0700 and 0800 h. Sleep was assessed at baseline, directly after treatment, and 2 weeks after the end of treatment. Objective measures were obtained by actigraphy, self-reported measures by various sleep questionnaires and a sleep diary. Melatonin with or without BLT did not advance sleep times, improve sleep in general, or strengthen wake-activity rhythms. So even though the DLMO had advanced, sleep timing did not follow. Adding extensive behavioral coaching to chronotherapy is necessary for advancing sleep times along with DLMO and to further alleviate ADHD symptoms.

van den Bossche, R. A., et al. (2004). "[The teenager who finds it difficult to wake up in the morning: aberrant behavior, misperception or an underlying sleep disorder?]." Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd 148(7): 301-304.
	Three teenagers, two girls aged 14 years and one boy aged 10 years, had had difficulty with getting to sleep in the evening and waking up in the morning from a very early age. These difficulties led to underperformance at school and/or tension in the household. The anamneses and a sleep study led to the following conclusions: 'delayed sleep phase syndrome', 'sleep state misperception' and 'aberrant interaction between the child and its parents'. Treatment with phototherapy and regulation of the bedtimes, information and regulation of the bedtimes, and pedagogic advice, respectively, was successful within a few months. Teenagers often complain about problems with sleeping, in particular about late onset of sleep and difficulties with awakening. These problems are self-limiting in most cases, but can have a disastrous influence on social life and education.

van den Heuvel, C. J. and K. Lushington (2002). "Chronobiology and insomnia: pathophysiology and treatment of circadian rhythm sleep disorders." Expert Rev Neurother 2(2): 249-260.
	This review summarizes current knowledge of sleep disorders with a chronobiological basis, including: delayed sleep phase syndrome, advanced sleep phase syndrome, non24 h sleep-wake syndrome and irregular sleep-wake pattern disorder. These circadian rhythm sleep disorders are characterized by a misalignment between the timing of the sleep period with respect to the day-night cycle and as a consequence of patients attempting to maintain 'normal' social hours, reduced sleep quality. In addition to the specific circadian rhythm sleep disorders, this review will also examine current drug (e.g., hypnotics and melatonin) and nondrug (e.g., bright light therapy and chronotherapy) treatments, the overlap with psychophysiological insomnia and future directions.

van der Ploeg, E. S. and D. W. O'Connor (2014). "Methodological challenges in studies of bright light therapy to treat sleep disorders in nursing home residents with dementia." Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 68(11): 777-784.
	AIM: Numerous studies have explored the effectiveness of bright light therapy as a treatment of sleep disorders in nursing home and long-stay geriatric hospital residents, most of whom have dementia. A recent Cochrane Collaboration meta-analysis of 10 selected studies concluded that there was insufficient evidence to assess its therapeutic efficacy as most available studies had methodological problems. We sought to remedy this situation by developing proposals to guide research methods in future studies. METHODS: Based on the literature and our own clinical and research experience, we developed a series of proposals relating to study design, participant selection, light delivery modalities and outcome measures that we believe will maximize the chances of identifying a bright light treatment effect. We then checked adherence to these proposals in all relevant published experimental studies. RESULTS: Of the 18 studies published in the last two decades that met our selection criteria, only half the studies had selected participants with a sleep disorder. Eleven studies excluded people with severe vision loss; seven included a clinical rating of sleep, and five measured baseline lighting levels. Most checked psychoactive medication prescriptions but few reported changes in prescriptions over the course of the study. Most also checked treatment adherence and included some control for differences in amount of social contact. CONCLUSIONS: Evidence for the effectiveness of bright white light treatment in people residing in nursing homes is equivocal. We anticipate that the quality of this evidence will be improved if researchers refine their study methods and adopt a more uniform approach.

van Maanen, A., et al. (2017). "Effects of Melatonin and Bright Light Treatment in Childhood Chronic Sleep Onset Insomnia With Late Melatonin Onset: A Randomized Controlled Study." Sleep 40(2).
	STUDY OBJECTIVES: Chronic sleep onset insomnia with late melatonin onset is prevalent in childhood, and has negative daytime consequences. Melatonin treatment is known to be effective in treating these sleep problems. Bright light therapy might be an alternative treatment, with potential advantages over melatonin treatment. In this study, we compare the effects of melatonin and bright light treatment with a placebo condition in children with chronic sleep onset insomnia and late melatonin onset. METHODS: Eighty-four children (mean age 10.0 years, 61% boys) first entered a baseline week, after which they received melatonin (N = 26), light (N = 30), or placebo pills (N = 28) for 3 to 4 weeks. Sleep was measured daily with sleep diaries and actigraphy. Before and after treatment children completed a questionnaire on chronic sleep reduction, and Dim Light Melatonin Onset (DLMO) was measured. Results were analyzed with linear mixed model analyses. RESULTS: Melatonin treatment and light therapy decreased sleep latency (sleep diary) and advanced sleep onset (sleep diary and actigraphy), although for sleep onset the effects of melatonin were stronger. In addition, melatonin treatment advanced DLMO and had positive effects on sleep latency and sleep efficiency (actigraphy data), and sleep time (sleep diary and actigraphy data). However, wake after sleep onset (actigraphy) increased with melatonin treatment. No effects on chronic sleep reduction were found. CONCLUSIONS: We found positive effects of both melatonin and light treatment on various sleep outcomes, but more and stronger effects were found for melatonin treatment.

van Maanen, A., et al. (2016). "The effects of light therapy on sleep problems: A systematic review and meta-analysis." Sleep Med Rev 29: 52-62.
	Although bright light therapy seems a promising treatment for sleep problems, research shows inconclusive results. This meta-analysis is the first to systematically review the effect of light therapy on sleep problems in general and on specific types of sleep problems in particular (circadian rhythm sleep disorders, insomnia, sleep problems related to Alzheimer's disease and dementia). Fifty-three studies with a total of 1154 participants were included. Overall effects and effects on separate circadian and sleep outcomes were examined. We calculated Hedges' g effect sizes and we investigated the effects of twelve moderators (design-related, treatment-related, participant-related). Light therapy was found effective in the treatment of sleep problems in general (g = 0.39), and for circadian rhythm sleep disorders (g = 0.41), insomnia (g = 0.47), and sleep problems related to Alzheimer's disease/dementia (g = 0.30) specifically. For circadian rhythm sleep disorders, effects were smaller for randomised controlled trials. For insomnia, we found larger effects for studies using a higher light intensity, and for sleep problems related to Alzheimer's disease/dementia larger effects were found for studies with more female participants. There was indication of publication bias. To conclude, light therapy is effective for sleep problems in general, particularly for circadian outcomes and insomnia symptoms. However, most effect sizes are small to medium.

Vander Wal, J. S. (2014). "The Treatment of Night Eating Syndrome: A Review and Theoretical Model." Curr Obes Rep 3(1): 137-144.
	The treatment of night eating syndrome, a disorder characterized by evening hyperphagia, morning anorexia, and insomnia, continues to gain attention with its inclusion in the DSM-V. Known treatments for NES include pharmacological, phototherapy, weight loss and dietary, and psychological interventions, which, together with the syndrome's clinical characteristics, support a treatment guiding biobehavioral model. The biobehavioral model proposes that a genetic predisposition, coupled with stress, enhances midbrain serotonin transporter (SERT) binding, which results in lower post-synaptic serotonin, dysregulating circadian rhythms and decreasing satiety. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors should therefore decrease SERT binding, increase postsynaptic serotonin, and restore circadian function and satiety regulation. Psychological interventions may be used to decrease stress as well as address insomnia and circadian rhythm disruptions. Dietary and behavioral interventions may produce beneficial changes in satiety as well as dysregulated eating. Avenues for future treatment outcome studies, including alternative pharmacological and combination therapies, are discussed.

Vashurin, I., et al. (2021). "The effect of narrow-band ultraviolet B radiation on sleep, happiness, and appetite: A prospective cohort study." Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed 37(4): 278-284.
	BACKGROUND: The health benefits of sunlight are well documented, including the effects on happiness and sleep. However, only a few studies have investigated the benefits of artificial narrow-band ultraviolet B (NB-UVB) radiation. OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effect of NB-UVB on sleep quality, happiness, and appetite. METHODS: Patients from a single phototherapy unit were selected, and their epidemiological characteristics were documented. Subjects were asked to complete questionnaires including the Pittsburg Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), Subjective Happiness Scale (SHS), and the Simplified Nutritional Appetite Questionnaire (SNAQ) 4 weeks before and after the initiation of the NB-UVB therapy. The sample consisted of 52 patients. RESULTS: Four weeks after the initiation of NB-UVB sessions, sleep quality was significantly improved (the PSQI decreased from 6.5 to 5.23 (t = -3.52, P < .01). In contrast, subjective happiness did not improve (the SHS decreased from baseline 5.5 to 5.2, P > .05). Similarly, appetite did not change (the SNAQ score increased from baseline 14.75 to 15.05, P > .05) and body mass index was not affected by phototherapy. In general, men were found to have better sleep quality before and after UV light therapy. CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that NB-UVB exposure over 4 weeks improves sleep quality; however, it does not influence happiness or appetite.

Vecchierini, M. F., et al. (2021). "Melatonin (MEL) and its use in neurological diseases and insomnia: Recommendations of the French Medical and Research Sleep Society (SFRMS)." Rev Neurol (Paris) 177(3): 245-259.
	The French Medicine and Research Sleep Society had organized a consensus conference about sleep/wake circadian rhythms and their disorders. During this conference a subgroup of 11 sleep doctors/researchers looked specifically at the use of MEL in different pathologies. This article gives a summary of the main results of MEL therapy in some neurological diseases and insomnia approved by this consensus group. Exogenous MEL, which crosses the blood-brain barrier, has been used as a treatment in its two available forms: an immediate release form that principally shows a chronobiotic action and a long release form that mimics the physiological MEL secretion rhythm and is used to replace reduced physiological secretion. MEL secretion decreases frequently with age, mostly in elderly insomniacs and dementia patients. Results of level A studies show that MEL therapy, used as an add-on treatment, has beneficial effects in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer patients with sleep disorders in improving sleep quality and in regulating the sleep/wake rhythm. MEL has to be prescribed as early as possible and for a long period, at a dose of 2 to 5 or 10 mg. It may have a beneficial effect on cognitive function in MCI but shows no effect in moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease. It should be emphasized that there are no serious side effects with MEL treatment. In these diseases, light therapy used 12 hours before melatonin treatment has a positive synergic effect. In REM sleep behavior disorder, immediate release MEL should be prescribed first as its side effect profile is much better than clonazepam shortly before bedtime. MEL has a good efficacy on clinical symptoms and PSG REM sleep without atonia episodes and is well tolerated. In Parkinson disease with sleep disorders and without REM sleep behavior disorder, MEL seems to improve subjective sleep quality but no conclusions can be drawn. There is insufficient scientific proof for using MEL as a prophylactic treatment in primary headache, migraine and cluster headache. In epileptic patients, MEL can be safely used to regulate the sleep/wake rhythm and to improve insomnia but more randomized controlled studies are necessary. In primary or no-comorbid insomnia, only a 2 mg dose of slow release MEL, 1 to 2 hours before bedtime, over a period of 3 to 12 weeks, is recommended. It decreases sleep onset latency, improves quality of sleep, morning alertness and quality of life without serious side effects and without withdrawal symptoms.

Verma, S., et al. (2020). "Cognitive Behavioural Therapy and Light Dark Therapy for Maternal Postpartum Insomnia Symptoms: Protocol of a Parallel-Group Randomised Controlled Efficacy Trial." Front Glob Womens Health 1: 591677.
	Background: Symptoms of insomnia are common in new mothers and have been associated with a range of negative maternal and child outcomes. Despite this, interventions to improve maternal postpartum sleep remain scarce. Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT) and Light Dark Therapy (LDT) represent two promising interventions for insomnia symptoms and associated daytime consequences such as fatigue. This randomised controlled trial examines whether CBT and LDT improve maternal insomnia symptoms as the primary outcome and maternal sleep disturbance, mood, fatigue, and sleepiness as secondary outcomes. This protocol paper outlines the development, design, and implementation of the trial. Methods: Participants are an Australian community-sample of 90 first-time mothers who are 4-12 months postpartum with self-reported symptoms of insomnia (Insomnia Severity Index scores ≥ 8). Exclusion criteria include current severe sleep/psychiatric disorders, unsettled infant sleep behaviour, sleep-affecting medication use, and photosensitivity. Eligible women are randomised into a CBT (strategies targeting sleep, worries, fatigue, and relaxation), LDT, or a treatment-as-usual control condition. Interventions are therapist-assisted and personalised through two telephone calls and include a series of automated intervention emails delivered over 6 weeks. Primary and secondary outcomes are assessed at four time points: baseline, intervention mid-point, post-intervention, and 1-month post-intervention. Discussion: If found effective, these interventions could represent efficacious, safe, and inexpensive treatments for improving postpartum insomnia and mitigate its negative impact on maternal well-being. Interventions tested are highly scalable and can be integrated into postpartum care and made available to the broader community. ANZCTR trial registration: Accessible at: https://anzctr.org.au/Trial/Registration/TrialReview.aspx?ACTRN=12618000842268.

Videnovic, A., et al. (2017). "Timed Light Therapy for Sleep and Daytime Sleepiness Associated With Parkinson Disease: A Randomized Clinical Trial." JAMA Neurol 74(4): 411-418.
	IMPORTANCE: Impaired sleep and alertness are some of the most common nonmotor manifestations of Parkinson disease (PD) and currently have only limited treatment options. Light therapy (LT), a widely available treatment modality in sleep medicine, has not been systematically studied in the PD population. OBJECTIVE: To determine the safety and efficacy of LT on excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) associated with PD. DESIGN, SETTINGS, AND PARTICIPANTS: This randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical intervention study was set in PD centers at Northwestern University and Rush University. Participants were 31 patients with PD receiving stable dopaminergic therapy with coexistent EDS, as assessed by an Epworth Sleepiness Scale score of 12 or greater, and without cognitive impairment or primary sleep disorder. Participants were randomized 1:1 to receive bright LT or dim-red LT (controlled condition) twice daily in 1-hour intervals for 14 days. This trial was conducted between March 1, 2007, and October 31, 2012. Data analysis of the intention-to-treat population was conducted from November 1, 2012, through April 30, 2016. MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary outcome measure was the change in the Epworth Sleepiness Scale score comparing the bright LT with the dim-red LT. Secondary outcome measures included the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index score, the Parkinson's Disease Sleep Scale score, the visual analog scale score for daytime sleepiness, and sleep log-derived and actigraphy-derived metrics. RESULTS: Among the 31 patients (13 males and 18 females; mean [SD] disease duration, 5.9 [3.6] years), bright LT resulted in significant improvements in EDS, as assessed by the Epworth Sleepiness Scale score (mean [SD], 15.81 [3.10] at baseline vs 11.19 [3.31] after the intervention). Both bright LT and dim-red LT were associated with improvements in sleep quality as captured by mean (SD) scores on the Pittsburg Sleep Quality Index (7.88 [4.11] at baseline vs 6.25 [4.27] after bright LT, and 8.87 [2.83] at baseline vs 7.33 [3.52] after dim-red LT) and the Parkinson's Disease Sleep Scale (97.24 [22.49] at baseline vs 106.98 [19.37] after bright LT, and 95.11 [19.86] at baseline vs 99.28 [16.94] after dim-red LT). Bright LT improved several self-reported mean (SD) sleep metrics, including sleep fragmentation (number of overnight awakenings, 1.51 [1.03] at baseline vs 0.92 [0.97] after the intervention), sleep quality (sleep diary score, 3.03 [1.01] at baseline vs 3.53 [0.91] after the intervention), and ease of falling asleep (sleep diary score, 2.32 [0.89] at baseline vs 1.83 [0.88] after the intervention). Light therapy was associated with increased daily physical activity as assessed by actigraphy (average activity [SD] counts, 165.01 [66.87] at baseline vs 194.59 [87.81] after the intervention). CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Light therapy was well tolerated and may be a feasible intervention for improving the sleep-wake cycles in patients with PD. Further studies are required to determine optimal parameters of LT for PD. TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01338649.

Voysey, Z. J., et al. (2021). "The Treatment of Sleep Dysfunction in Neurodegenerative Disorders." Neurotherapeutics 18(1): 202-216.
	Sleep dysfunction is highly prevalent across the spectrum of neurodegenerative conditions and is a key determinant of quality of life for both patients and their families. Mounting recent evidence also suggests that such dysfunction exacerbates cognitive and affective clinical features of neurodegeneration, as well as disease progression through acceleration of pathogenic processes. Effective assessment and treatment of sleep dysfunction in neurodegeneration is therefore of paramount importance; yet robust therapeutic guidelines are lacking, owing in part to a historical paucity of effective treatments and trials. Here, we review the common sleep abnormalities evident in neurodegenerative disease states and evaluate the latest evidence for traditional and emerging interventions, both pharmacological and nonpharmacological. Interventions considered include conservative measures, targeted treatments of specific clinical sleep pathologies, established sedating and alerting agents, melatonin, and orexin antagonists, as well as bright light therapy, behavioral measures, and slow-wave sleep augmentation techniques. We conclude by providing a suggested framework for treatment based on contemporary evidence and highlight areas that may emerge as major therapeutic advances in the near future.

Waage, S., et al. (2014). "Predictors of shift work disorder among nurses: a longitudinal study." Sleep Med 15(12): 1449-1455.
	BACKGROUND: Shift work is associated with sleep problems and impaired health. The main aim of the present study was to explore predictors of developing shift work disorder (SWD) among Norwegian nurses using a longitudinal design. METHODS: A total of 1533 nurses participating in a survey on shift work, sleep and health responded to questionnaires at baseline and at follow-up about two years later. SWD was defined as problems of excessive sleepiness and/or complaints of insomnia related to the work schedule. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: There was a significant reduction (p < 0.001) in the prevalence of SWD from baseline to follow-up, from 35.7% to 28.6%. Logistic regression analyses showed significant risks of having SWD at follow-up and the following variables measured at baseline: number of nights worked the last year (OR = 1.01, 95% CI = 1.01-1.02), having SWD (OR = 5.19, 95% CI = 3.74-7.20), composite score on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (OR = 1.08, 95% CI = 1.04-1.13), use of melatonin (OR = 4.20, 95% CI = 1.33-13.33), use of bright light therapy (OR = 3.10, 95% CI 1.14-8.39), and symptoms of depression measured by the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (OR = 1.07, 95% CI = 1.00-1.14). In addition, leaving night work between baseline and follow-up was associated with a significantly reduced risk of SWD at follow-up (OR = 0.12, 95% CI = 0.07-0.22).

Weiss, B., et al. (2016). "Exposure to light and darkness and its influence on physiological measures of intensive care unit patients-a systematic literature review." Physiol Meas 37(9): R73-87.
	Sleep-wake patterns are often significantly disturbed in critically ill patients. This disturbance is closely linked to secondary brain dysfunctions in these patients. Sedation not only impairs sleep quality in ICU patients but also has detrimental effects on short- and long-term outcome. In other contexts, light therapy has been proven to be effective in maintaining and resynchronizing circadian rhythmicity in humans. The objective of this systematic review was to analyse studies that investigated the effect of exposure to light or darkness on physiological measures and clinical outcomes of adult ICU patients. Studies were systematically identified by searching electronic bibliographic databases (The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL, The Cochrane Library, 2002) and MEDLINE via PubMed). The search algorithm identified a total of 156 articles, 10 of which were taken into final review. These 10 selected articles included 3 were monocentric RCTs, five prospective cohort studies, one retrospective cohort study, and one manuscript that included a partial systematic review of the literature. Included trials were published between 2007 and 2015. Five of these studies used multiple intervention approaches while four trials used a single intervention approach. Among all studies, 1,278 patients were analysed (489 prospectively). There was a high heterogeneity among the studies in terms of applied intervention and outcome measures. The most frequent methodological limitations were a lack of precise definitions regarding the illuminance and the light spectrum utilised. The analyses indicate that further studies including clearly defined interventions with objective outcome measures, as these are currently lacking, would add significant knowledge to this new field of research.

Wessolowski, N., et al. (2020). "[Effect of light therapy on the night sleep of children with sleep problems]." Z Kinder Jugendpsychiatr Psychother 48(2): 123-131.
	Effect of light therapy on the night sleep of children with sleep problems Abstract. Studies on the effect of light therapy on the nighttime sleep of adolescents revealed earlier sleep onset and longer sleep periods. The present study examines the corresponding effects in children. A group of 28 children (M = 10.0; SD = 1.65 years) with difficulties falling asleep and sleeping through the night received a light therapy device for home application. The effect was investigated by an A-B-A-B design with four measurement points. We detected significant, small- to medium-sized effects on the children's sleep-onset problems and ability to sleep through the night as well as mood. Sleep onset was reduced by approximately 10 minutes. The representativeness of the sample is limited, but the results largely correspond to the findings in adolescents. Because of the weekly switch between application and nonapplication, the true circadian effects might be underestimated. In principle, however, the effects found in adolescents appear to be transferable to children, though further research is necessary.

Weydahl, A. (1994). "Evening melatonin in January after changes in hours of habitual exercise during fall among youths living in the subarctic." Arctic Med Res 53(3): 146-151.
	Secretion of the hormone melatonin shows a circadian rhythm and is inhibited by light. Light therapy with phase shifting of the melatonin rhythm has been used as treatment of sleeping problems and seasonal affective disorders (SAD). Exercise has also been shown to suppress the melatonin secretion. In order to investigate the effect of increased level of habitual physical activity upon melatonin secretion in areas with extreme short days and high level of midwinter insomnia, 18 high school students participated in this study. Their habitual physical activity throughout two consecutive falls were recorded. The following January, blood samples were taken for melatonin analyses from 1530h to 2300h. After the fall with highest habitual activity level, the plasma melatonin showed significantly decreased values at all sampling times compared to values after lowest level of activity. The relative increase in melatonin level at 2300h, however, tended to be of a greater magnitude after the fall with highest activity compared to the fall with lowest activity (p = .094). A change in habitual level of activity should be thought of as a possible help for treating midwinter insomnia and SAD.

Wheatley, D. (1999). "Hypericum in seasonal affective disorder (SAD)." Curr Med Res Opin 15(1): 33-37.
	Volunteers from the membership of the SAD Association took part in a postal survey, before and after eight weeks' treatment with Hypericum (Kira), using an 11-item rating scale. The maximum score is 44 and the mean score in 168 patients using Kira alone was 21.3. This fell to 13 at endpoint (p < 0.001). The corresponding figures for 133 patients using Kira + light therapy were 20.6 and 11.8, respectively (p < 0.001). In both groups, there was significant improvement in anxiety, loss of libido and insomnia. There were no significant between-group differences on any measure except that improvement in sleep was greater in the Kira + light group (p < 0.01). On the results of this survey, Hypericum would appear to be an effective treatment for SAD.

Wichniak, A., et al. (2017). "Treatment guidelines for Circadian Rhythm Sleep - Wake Disorders of the Polish Sleep Research Society and the Section of Biological Psychiatry of the Polish Psychiatric Association. Part II. Diagnosis and treatment." Psychiatr Pol 51(5): 815-832.
	AIM: Circadian rhythm sleep-wake disorders (CRSWD) are a group of disorders, in which the timing of sleep and wakefulness significantly differs from a patient's expectations or socially acceptable times. The aimof the article is to present the current principles for the diagnosis and treatment of CRSWD in adults and children. METHOD: Guidelines proposed as CRSWD treatment standard are based on the recommendations from the scientific societies involved in the sleep research and medicine. Researchers participating in the guidelines preparation were invited by the Polish Sleep Research Society and the Section of Biological Psychiatry of the Polish Psychiatric Association based on their significant contribution to the circadian rhythm research and/or clinical experience in the treatment of these disorders. Finally, the guidelines were adjusted to the questions and comments given by the members of both Societies. RESULTS: Patients with endogenous CRSWD are often misdiagnosed and treated for insomnia or hypersomnia. Therefore, each patient reporting sleep-wake disorders should be interviewed about the quality of sleep and its timing during free days (e.g. weekends, holidays). Avalid CRSWD diagnosis can be also established by using sleep diaries/logs and actigraphy. The treatment of choice for CRSWD is chronotherapy, which involves melatonin application, light therapy, and behavioral interventions. Sleep disorders associated with shift work and time zone changes are a growing health problem. Interventions for these disorders should primarily focus on prevention. CONCLUSIONS: The main problem in the treatment of CRSWD is an invalid diagnosis. Hypnotics and/or psychostimulants are often used instead of chronotherapeutic interventions, what can alleviate symptoms but is not an effective treatment.

Willis, G. L., et al. (2018). "Polychromatic Light Exposure as a Therapeutic in the Treatment and Management of Parkinson's Disease: A Controlled Exploratory Trial." Front Neurol 9: 741.
	Parkinson's disease (PD) is a disorder characterized by loss of dopamine (DA) in the nigro-striatal dopamine (NSD) system with the primary symptoms of bradykinaesia, rigidity, tremor, and altered gate. Secondary symptoms including depression, insomnia, involuntary movement, and psychiatric side effects are also commonly observed. While the treatment focus for the past 50 years has been aimed at replacing deficient DA, to relieve the primary symptoms, more recent studies have suggested that the circadian system plays a critical role in the etiology and treatment of this disorder. Several case studies and open label trials have implemented bright light therapy (BT) in an attempt to repair sleep, depression and even the primary motor symptoms of this disorder, however controlled studies are yet to be fully implemented. In this controlled trial, patients that had been maintained on BT daily for 4 months to 5 years previously were assigned to one of three groups: continued polychromatic light, continued with red light or discontinued polychromatic light for a 2 week period. The Movement Disorder Society-Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDSUPDRS), The Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire (PDQ-39), The Beck Depression Inventory II, The Beck Anxiety Inventory, The Epworth Sleep Scale (ESS) and a global rating scale were used to assess patients prior to and at 1 and 2 weeks after commencing the trial. Patients continuing polychromatic BT showed significant improvement on the MDSUPDRS Rating Scale (12 points; p = 0.028), the PDQ-39 (10 points; p = 0.011), ESS (4 points; p = 0.013), and numerous motor and secondary symptoms on a global rating scale. Performance on standardized motor tests also incrementally improved in this group while those exposed to red light and those that discontinued BT treatment deteriorated. These results demonstrate that strategically applied polychromatic light was beneficial in reducing many primary motor and secondary symptoms of PD. Further work investigating the role of light in mitigating PD symptoms and involvement of the circadian system will provide further advances in the treatment of PD. Clinical Trial Registration: http://www.anzctr.org.au, identifier ACTRN12617001309370.

Willis, G. L., et al. (2012). "A historical justification for and retrospective analysis of the systematic application of light therapy in Parkinson's disease." Rev Neurosci 23(2): 199-226.
	For the past 40 years the primary purpose of therapeutics for Parkinson's disease (PD) has been to replace deficient dopamine (DA) in the nigrostriatal dopamine (NSD) system. Even in the presence of limited efficacy, abundant side effects and impoverished quality of life, the involvement of other systems in the aetiology and treatment of this disorder has been sorely neglected and the excessive use of DA replacement therapy (DART) continues on a global basis. Recent scientific work suggests that the retina plays a major role in NSD function and intimates light therapy in the management of PD. After a thorough review of historical evidence supporting this contention, a retrospective, open-label study on 129 PD patients, whereby they were monitored for a period extending for a few months to eight years, was carried out. Primary motor and non-motor symptoms were monitored using an objectified global rating scale and timed motor tests that were assessed at regular intervals for the duration of the study. Thirty-one patients with other neurological disorders (OND) served as controls to determine whether any therapeutic effects seen with light were generalizable across other conditions. Patients were classified as compliant (COM), semi-compliant (SCOM), or early quit (EQUIT; prematurely discontinued treatment). EQUIT patients showed deterioration, while the COM group improved on most parameters. The SCOM patients were not as good as the COM group. The OND group showed significant improvement in depression and insomnia, but exposure to light did not improve motor function. The total drug burden of PD patients maintained on light was less with fewer side effects than SCOM or EQUIT groups. These results confirm the value of the strategic application of light therapy with controlled doses of DART in PD and warrants further controlled investigation. That the symptomatic improvement continued as long patients remained in the program suggests that exposure to light, under a strict daily regimen, combined with controlled DART, actively slows or arrests the progressive degenerative process underlying PD.

Willis, G. L. and E. J. Turner (2007). "Primary and secondary features of Parkinson's disease improve with strategic exposure to bright light: a case series study." Chronobiol Int 24(3): 521-537.
	The antagonism of melatonin in models of Parkinson's disease (PD) can reduce the severity of motor impairment associated with dopamine (DA) degeneration. In consideration of the potent antidepressant effects of bright light therapy (LT), that LT suppresses melatonin secretion, that depression is commonly observed in PD, and that exposure to constant light facilitates recovery from experimental PD, the object of the present study was to strategically administer LT to PD patients and observe the effects on depression, insomnia, and motor performance. Twelve patients diagnosed with PD were exposed to white fluorescent light for 1-1.5 h at an intensity of 1000 to 1500 lux once daily commencing 1 h prior to the usual time of sleep onset, approximately 22:00 h in most patients. All patients were assessed before LT commenced and at two weeks, five weeks, and regular intervals thereafter. Within two weeks after commencing LT, marked improvement in bradykinaesia and rigidity was observed in most patients. Tremor was not affected by LT treatment; however, agitation, dyskinaesia, and psychiatric side effects were reduced, as verified by decreased requirement for DA replacement therapy. Elevated mood, improved sleep, decreased seborrhea, reduced impotence, and increased appetite were observed after LT. LT permitted the reduction of the dose of L-dopa, bromocriptine, or deprenyl in some patients by up to 50% without loss of symptom control. Factors limiting the efficacy of LT included multiple disease states, treatment compliance, polypharmacy, emotional stress, advanced age, and predominance of positive symptoms. The results of this case series study confirms previous work describing light as efficacious in the treatment of PD and suggest that controlled trials may help to elucidate how LT might be used strategically as an adjunct therapy to improve the morbidity of PD patients.

Winkler-Pjrek, E., et al. (2016). "Use of Light Therapy by Office-Based Physicians." Neuropsychobiology 74(4): 182-187.
	BACKGROUND: Light therapy (LT) is a non-pharmacological biological treatment that has been used in psychiatry since the 1980s. Previous research has investigated the usage of LT in hospitals. The aim of this study was to examine the pattern of use of LT by office-based physicians. METHODS: A questionnaire was sent by mail to 400 randomly selected doctors in Austria. We made sure that the sample was equally representative of general practitioners (GPs) and psychiatrists, public health service doctors and private doctors, physicians in cities and in the country as well as male and female doctors. Non-responders were asked by phone and e-mail to answer the questionnaire. We achieved a response rate of 27.7%. RESULTS: LT was generally recommended by 67.3% of all physicians (91.6% of the psychiatrists but only 46.6% of the GPs). The recommended location of treatment was patients' homes in 90%. Physicians were asked whether they considered LT to be an appropriate treatment for various disorders. There were affirmative answers from: 94.2% for seasonal affective disorder (SAD), 93.3% for sub-syndromal SAD, 60.6% for non-seasonal recurrent major depressive disorder, 35.6% for jet lag syndrome, 35.6% for chronobiological problems with shift work, 22.1% for insomnia, 13.5% for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, and 10.6% for behavioural problems with Alzheimer's disease. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that LT is regularly recommended by office-based physicians, especially psychiatrists. However, there is potential for greater application of LT in indications other than depressive disorder. The results found here are comparable to previous findings in psychiatric hospitals.

Wong, W. M., et al. (2023). "Effectiveness of Pharmacological and Nonpharmacological Interventions for Managing the Fatigue-Sleep Disturbance-Depression Symptom Cluster in Breast Cancer Patients Undergoing Chemotherapy: A Systematic Review." Cancer Nurs 46(2): E70-e80.
	BACKGROUND: The symptom cluster of cancer-related fatigue-sleep disturbance-depression (F-S-D) is common among breast cancer (BC) patients undergoing chemotherapy. Given the coexisting nature and synergistic effect of this symptom cluster, interventions for managing it are expected to benefit patient outcomes. OBJECTIVES: The aims of this study were to examine the effectiveness and identify the essential components of interventions used to manage the F-S-D and quality of life (QOL) in BC patients undergoing chemotherapy. METHODS: A systematic review was performed in March 2020 through 7 electronic databases. Relevant studies were assessed using the inclusion criteria. The level of evidence was assessed using the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool. The results were summarized and synthesized in narrative forms. RESULTS: Sixteen randomized controlled trials were included. Results showed that bright light therapy, acupressure, and psychological nursing interventions were useful in managing F-S-D in BC patients. Exercise and diet counseling alleviated F-D, whereas stress management and a health promotion program alleviated S-D. Bright light therapy, exercise, diet counseling, and psychological nursing interventions enhanced the QOL of these patients. CONCLUSION: Interventions that could alleviate F-S, F-D, S-D, and F-S-D in BC patients and enhance their QOL were identified. Future studies should investigate the effects of evidence-based multimodal interventions that integrate psychological support, education on the management of chemotherapy side effects, and diet counseling and exercise on F-S-D in and reduced QOL of BC patients undergoing chemotherapy. IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Nurses act as patient advocates, and the development of evidence-based interventions for managing F-S-D and QOL is significant to nursing practice.

Wu, B., et al. (2018). "On-orbit sleep problems of astronauts and countermeasures." Mil Med Res 5(1): 17.
	Sufficient sleep duration and good sleep quality are crucial to ensure normal physical and mental health, cognition and work performance for the common people, as well as astronauts. On-orbit sleep problem is very common among astronauts and has potential detrimental influences on the health of crewmembers and the safety of flight missions. Sleep in space is becoming a new medical research frontier. In this review we summarized on-orbit sleep problems of astronauts and six kinds of causes, and we presented the effects of lack of sleep on performance as well as mental and physical health, then we proposed seven kinds of countermeasures for sleep disturbance in spaceflight, including pharmacologic interventions, light treatment, crew selection and training, Traditional Chinese Medicine and so on. Furthermore, we discussed and oriented the prospect of researches on sleep in space.

Wu, H. S., et al. (2021). "Bright light shows promise in improving sleep, depression, and quality of life in women with breast cancer during chemotherapy: findings of a pilot study." Chronobiol Int 38(5): 694-704.
	Sleep and fatigue-associated symptoms are prominent during chemotherapy. The purpose of this pilot study was to examine bright light effects on sleep disruption, fatigue, daytime sleepiness, depression, and quality of life (QOL) in women with stage I-III breast cancer undergoing chemotherapy. In this 2-group randomized controlled trial (NCT02658708), participants were randomized to receive either blue-green light of 12,000 lux (experimental) or dim red light of 5 lux (control). Light therapy was self-administered using a light visor cap at home. Both groups received 30-minute daily light therapy for 21 consecutive days following the 2(nd) cycle of chemotherapy. Sleep quality, fatigue, daytime sleepiness, depression, and QOL were self-reported, and nocturnal sleep was monitored by ambulatory polysomnography before the initiation of chemotherapy (baseline) and following the light intervention (posttest). Relative change was assessed at posttest controlling for pretest scores. At posttest, the experimental group self-reported significantly shorter sleep latency than controls (10 vs. 20 min, p = .045) consistent with polysomnography findings (14 vs. 63 min). Polysomnography also revealed longer total sleep time (467 vs. 315 min) and higher sleep efficiency (74% vs. 58%) in experimental vs. controls. Participants receiving bright light experienced a 30% relative decrease in depression, while there was a 24% increase in the controls. The experimental group reported substantially fewer increases in symptom intensity than controls (33% vs. 166%). These findings suggest that bright light likely improved sleep quality and depression and mitigated worsening intensity of symptoms during the first three cycles of chemotherapy. However, features of bright light, e.g., treatment duration, frequency, and timing in relation to chemotherapy treatment require further investigation.

Wu, H. S., et al. (2022). "Evaluating chronotypically tailored light therapy for breast cancer survivors: Preliminary findings on fatigue and disrupted sleep." Chronobiol Int 39(2): 221-232.
	More than one-third of cancer survivors experience significant residual symptoms after treatment completion. Fatigue and sleep disruption often co-occur and exacerbate each other. The purpose of this preliminary analysis was to examine the effect of a chronotypically tailored light therapy on fatigue and sleep disruption in female survivors 1-3 years post-completion of chemotherapy and/or radiation for stage I to III breast cancer. The data for this analysis were collected as part of an ongoing two-group randomized controlled trial (NCT03304587). Participants were randomized to receive either bright blue-green light (experimental) or dim red light (control). Light therapy was self-administered using a light visor cap at home. Both groups received 30-min daily light therapy for 14 consecutive days either between 19:00 and 20:00 h (for morning chronotypes) or within 30 min of waking in the morning (for evening chronotypes). Fatigue and sleep quality were self-reported using the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS)-Fatigue, PROMIS-Sleep Disturbance, Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, and a daily log before (pre-test) and following the light intervention (post-test). Linear mixed model analysis or generalized estimating equations examined group difference overtime adjusting for pre-test scores. No between-group differences were found. However, after adjusting for the baseline fatigue, the experimental group reported significant decreases in fatigue (p < .001) and sleep disturbance (p = .024) overtime. The experimental group also reported significantly better subjective sleep quality after 14 d of light therapy (p = .017). Positive trends in sleep latency, sleep duration, night-time awakenings, and early morning awakenings were also observed. Unexpectedly, sleep disturbance significantly decreased in the control group (p = .030). Those who received dim light control reported significantly shorter sleep latency (p = .002), longer total sleep time (p = .042), and greater habitual sleep efficiency (p = .042). These findings suggest that bright light therapy significantly improved post-treatment fatigue and subjective sleep quality in breast cancer survivors. Although it remains to be confirmed, the findings additionally show unexpected benefits of dim light on sleep. Properly timed light exposure may optimize the therapeutic effect and can be the key for successful light therapy. How the administration timing coupled with wavelengths (short vs. long) and intensity of light affecting fatigue and disrupted sleep requires further investigation.

Wu, L. M., et al. (2018). "The Effect of Systematic Light Exposure on Sleep in a Mixed Group of Fatigued Cancer Survivors." J Clin Sleep Med 14(1): 31-39.
	STUDY OBJECTIVES: Sleep disturbances are commonly reported by cancer survivors. Systematic light exposure using bright light has been used to improve sleep in other populations. In this secondary data analysis, the effect of morning administration of bright light on sleep and sleep quality was examined in a mixed group of fatigued cancer survivors. METHODS: Forty-four cancer survivors screened for cancer-related fatigue were randomized to either a bright white light or a comparison dim red light condition. Participants were instructed to use a light box every morning for 30 minutes for 4 weeks. Wrist actigraphy and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index were administered at 4 time points: prior to light treatment (baseline), 2 weeks into the intervention, during the last week of the intervention, and 3 weeks postintervention. Thirty-seven participants completed the end-of-intervention assessment. RESULTS: Repeated-measures linear mixed models indicated a statistically significant time × treatment group interaction effect with sleep efficiency improving more in the bright light condition over time compared with the dim light condition (F(3,42) = 5.55; P = .003) with a large effect size (partial η(2) = 0.28). By the end of the intervention and 3 weeks postintervention, mean sleep efficiency in the bright light group was in the normal range. Medium to large effect sizes were also seen in sleep quality, total sleep time, and wake after sleep onset for participants favoring the bright light condition. CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that systematic bright light exposure in the morning may have beneficial effects on sleep in fatigued cancer survivors. Larger scale efficacy trials are warranted. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Registry: ClinicalTrials.gov, Title: Treating Cancer-Related Fatigue Through Systematic Light Exposure, Identifier: NCT01873794, URL: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01873794.

Wu, L. M., et al. (2022). "Examining the Efficacy of Bright Light Therapy on Cognitive Function in Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplant Survivors." J Biol Rhythms 37(5): 471-483.
	Patients who have undergone hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) may experience cognitive impairment that can persist after treatment. Several studies have shown that bright light therapy may improve cognition, potentially due to its effects on the circadian system via brain regions that respond preferentially to light. In this double-blind randomized controlled trial, the efficacy of bright light therapy on cognition was examined in HSCT survivors. Forty-seven HSCT survivors at an urban hospital in the United States were screened for mild cognitive impairment, randomized to either bright white light (BWL) or comparison dim red light (DRL) conditions using a block randomization approach, and instructed to use their assigned light box every morning upon awakening for 30 min for 4 weeks. Assessments occurred at baseline, the end of the second week of the intervention, the end of the intervention, and at follow-up (8 weeks later). The primary outcome was objective cognitive function as measured by a global composite score on neuropsychological tests. Secondary outcomes included cognitive performance in individual domains, self-reported cognitive function, fatigue, sleep and sleep quality, and circadian rhythm robustness. Repeated-measures linear mixed models for both objective and self-reported cognitive function indicated significant main effects for time (ps < 0.05) suggesting significant improvements in both conditions over time. Time by light condition interaction effects were not significant. Models focused on secondary outcomes yielded no significant effects. Both BWL and DRL groups demonstrated significant improvements in objective cognitive and self-reported cognitive function over time, but there was no hypothesized effect of BWL over DRL nor associations with circadian rhythm robustness. Therapeutic effects of both light conditions, practice effects, and/or placebo effects may account for the findings.Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02677987 (9 February 2016).

Wyatt, J. K. (2004). "Delayed sleep phase syndrome: pathophysiology and treatment options." Sleep 27(6): 1195-1203.
	This paper presents a comprehensive review of delayed sleep phase syndrome (DSPS), a circadian-rhythm sleep disorder thought to result from the endogenous circadian pacemaker being "stuck" at a later-than-normal phase, relative to the desired sleep-wake schedule. A full understanding of this disorder is best appreciated from the context of shared modulation of sleep and wakefulness via sleep homeostatic and circadian systems. Typically emerging during adolescence, DSPS comes to clinical attention much less often than prevalence estimates would suggest, perhaps due to underrecognition by clinicians and misattribution of symptoms. Several treatment modalities have been suggested, including phototherapy, chronotherapy, and exogenous melatonin administration. However, caution is raised for the reason that more than 20 years after its initial description in the literature, the basic pathophysiology of DSPS remains poorly understood, as observed in the 2003 National Sleep Disorders Research Plan. Challenges for future research include elucidating the exact sleep homeostatic and circadian contributions to the disorder, improving the objective verification of this diagnosis instead of relying only on self-report information, and conducting treatment research aimed at determining efficacy, effectiveness, and mechanism or mechanisms of action.

Xiao, M., et al. (2021). "The therapeutic effects and safety of bright light therapy combined with escitalopram oxalate on insomnia in patients with poststroke depression." Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 36(1): 182-189.
	INTRODUCTION: Bright light therapy (BLT) is known to treat depression and sleep disorders in clinical practice, but its efficacy on poststroke depression (PSD) has not been studied. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the therapeutic effects and safety of BLT combined with escitalopram oxalate (ESC) on insomnia in patients with PSD. METHODS: Ischemic stroke patients with depressive symptoms and a score of ≥8 on the Hamilton Depression Scale (HAMD-17) while meeting DSM-IV criteria were diagnosed as having PSD. A total of 112 PSD patients with symptoms of insomnia were randomly assigned to polytherapy (BLT plus ESC) and monotherapy (ESC only) groups. Each regimen continued for 6 weeks. The primary outcomes were a change in scores on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and a remission rate (PSQI ≤7 at the endpoint). The secondary outcomes included changes in the HAMD-17 and Barthel Index (BI) scores. Adverse effects were assessed by the Adverse Events Scale. RESULTS: The endpoint assessment included 106 patients (monotherapy, 54; polytherapy, 52). The mean changes in the PSQI scores for the monotherapy and polytherapy groups were 4.85 (1.47) and 5.87 (1.72) (P = 0.001), respectively. Compared to monotherapy, polytherapy improved PSQI remission rate (71.4% vs 50.0%; χ2 = 5.390; P = 0.020), and HAMD-17 score (6.70 [2.12] vs 4.75 [1.98]; P < 0.001). Both treatments improved BI score, with no statistical difference, and were well tolerated, with few significant differences in treatment-associated adverse events. CONCLUSION: BLT combined with ESC is effective and well tolerated for the treatment of PSD-associated insomnia.

Xu, X. M., et al. (2018). "Complementary and alternative therapies for restless legs syndrome: An evidence-based systematic review." Sleep Med Rev 38: 158-167.
	Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is defined as an irresistible urge to move the legs, which is usually accompanied by paresthesias or dysesthesias at least twice weekly, and affects 2%-4% of adults in Europe and North America. This systematic review assesses the current complementary and alternative options for RLS and the potential benefits of those treatments on sleep quality, mood disorder, and quality of life. A systematic search of the PubMed, Embase, Cochrane, and Web of Science databases was conducted. Eighteen studies met the inclusion criterion, which included the use of the international RLS study group criteria. Complementary and alternative therapies have been found to be effective in both primary and secondary RLS. The severity of primary RLS symptoms can be significantly ameliorated by exercise training, transcutaneous spinal direct current stimulation, pneumatic compression devices, light therapy, repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation, and acupuncture. Pneumatic compression devices and yoga also improve RLS-related disorders. Exercise training is highly efficacious in the reduction of symptom severity in uremic RLS and related effects such as poor quality of life. Endovenous laser ablation may be a good choice for patients with concurrent RLS and superficial venous insufficiency.

Xu, Y., et al. (2020). "Dose-dependent effect of human milk on Bronchopulmonary dysplasia in very low birth weight infants." BMC Pediatr 20(1): 522.
	BACKGROUND AND AIM: Human milk has potential protective effects against bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). However, studies on the association between the dose of human milk and BPD in China are limited. This study aimed to evaluate the dose-dependent effects of human milk on BPD and other neonatal morbidities in very low birth weight (VLBW) infants. METHODS: This retrospective cohort study of preterm infants was conducted on preterm infants of gestational age ≤ 34 weeks and birth weight < 1500 g admitted to the multicenter clinical research database for breastfeeding quality improvement in Jiangsu province. The multivariate analysis was performed to compare the effect outcomes of daily graded doses [1-24 mL/(kg · day), 25-49 mL/(kg · day), and ≥ 50 mL/(kg · day) of body weight] of human milk on neonatal outcomes throughout the first 4 weeks of life versus a reference group receiving no human milk. The models were adjusted for potential confounding variables. RESULTS: Of 964 included infants, 279 (28.9%) received exclusive preterm formula, 128 (13.3%) received 1-24 ml/(kg · day), 139 (14.4%) received 25-49 ml/(kg · day), and 418 (43.4%) received ≥50 ml/(kg · day) human milk for the first 4 weeks of life. Compared with infants receiving exclusive formula, those receiving the highest volume of human milk daily [≥50 mL/(kg · day)] had lower incidences of BPD [27.5% in ≥50 mL/(kg · day) vs 40.1% in 0 mL/(kg · day) human milk, P = 0.001)], moderate and severe BPD [8.9% in ≥50 mL/(kg · day) vs 16.1% in 0 mL/(kg · day), P = 0.004], necrotizing enterocolitis [NEC; 3.8% in ≥50 mL/(kg · day) vs 10.8% in 0 mL/(kg · day), P = 0.001], late-onset sepsis [LOS; 9.3% in ≥50 mL/(kg · day) vs 19.7% in 0 mL/(kg · day), P <0.01], and extrauterine growth retardation [EUGR; 38.5% in ≥50 mL/(kg · day) vs 57.6% in 0 mL/(kg · day), P <0.01)]. The logistic regression indicated that those receiving ≥50 ml/kg · day human milk had lower odds of BPD [adjusted odds ratio (AOR) 0.453; 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.309, 0.666], moderate and severe BPD (AOR 0.430; 95% CI: 0.249, 0.742), NEC (AOR 0.314; 95% CI: 0.162, 0. 607), LOS (AOR 0.420; 95% CI: 0.263, 0.673), and EUGR (AOR 0.685; 95% CI: 0.479, 0.979). CONCLUSIONS: A daily threshold amount of ≥50 ml/(kg · day) human milk in the first 4 weeks of life was associated with lower incidence of BPD as well as NEC, LOS, and EUGR in VLBW infants. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03453502 . Registration date: March 5, 2018. This study was retrospectively registered.

Xu, Y., et al. (2020). "Dose-dependent effect of human milk on Bronchopulmonary dysplasia in very low birth weight infants." BMC Pediatr 20(1): 522.
	BACKGROUND AND AIM: Human milk has potential protective effects against bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). However, studies on the association between the dose of human milk and BPD in China are limited. This study aimed to evaluate the dose-dependent effects of human milk on BPD and other neonatal morbidities in very low birth weight (VLBW) infants. METHODS: This retrospective cohort study of preterm infants was conducted on preterm infants of gestational age ≤ 34 weeks and birth weight < 1500 g admitted to the multicenter clinical research database for breastfeeding quality improvement in Jiangsu province. The multivariate analysis was performed to compare the effect outcomes of daily graded doses [1-24 mL/(kg · day), 25-49 mL/(kg · day), and ≥ 50 mL/(kg · day) of body weight] of human milk on neonatal outcomes throughout the first 4 weeks of life versus a reference group receiving no human milk. The models were adjusted for potential confounding variables. RESULTS: Of 964 included infants, 279 (28.9%) received exclusive preterm formula, 128 (13.3%) received 1-24 ml/(kg · day), 139 (14.4%) received 25-49 ml/(kg · day), and 418 (43.4%) received ≥50 ml/(kg · day) human milk for the first 4 weeks of life. Compared with infants receiving exclusive formula, those receiving the highest volume of human milk daily [≥50 mL/(kg · day)] had lower incidences of BPD [27.5% in ≥50 mL/(kg · day) vs 40.1% in 0 mL/(kg · day) human milk, P = 0.001)], moderate and severe BPD [8.9% in ≥50 mL/(kg · day) vs 16.1% in 0 mL/(kg · day), P = 0.004], necrotizing enterocolitis [NEC; 3.8% in ≥50 mL/(kg · day) vs 10.8% in 0 mL/(kg · day), P = 0.001], late-onset sepsis [LOS; 9.3% in ≥50 mL/(kg · day) vs 19.7% in 0 mL/(kg · day), P <0.01], and extrauterine growth retardation [EUGR; 38.5% in ≥50 mL/(kg · day) vs 57.6% in 0 mL/(kg · day), P <0.01)]. The logistic regression indicated that those receiving ≥50 ml/kg · day human milk had lower odds of BPD [adjusted odds ratio (AOR) 0.453; 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.309, 0.666], moderate and severe BPD (AOR 0.430; 95% CI: 0.249, 0.742), NEC (AOR 0.314; 95% CI: 0.162, 0. 607), LOS (AOR 0.420; 95% CI: 0.263, 0.673), and EUGR (AOR 0.685; 95% CI: 0.479, 0.979). CONCLUSIONS: A daily threshold amount of ≥50 ml/(kg · day) human milk in the first 4 weeks of life was associated with lower incidence of BPD as well as NEC, LOS, and EUGR in VLBW infants. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT03453502 . Registration date: March 5, 2018. This study was retrospectively registered.

Yamadera, W., et al. (1998). "Clinical features of circadian rhythm sleep disorders in outpatients." Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 52(3): 311-316.
	The clinical data of 86 cases of primary circadian rhythm sleep disorder (primary CRSD) were retrospectively examined and compared to 40 cases of secondary circadian rhythm sleep disorder (secondary CRSD), who had presented with some kind of psychiatric or medical disorder, and had exhibited sleep-wake rhythm disorders that were judged to be secondary CRSD based on sleep logs. The comparison of cases found that: (i) the mean age at first presentation to the clinic was significantly younger for primary CRSD compared to secondary CRSD; (ii) more secondary CRSD cases were unemployed than were Primary CRSD cases; (iii) more cases in the secondary CRSD group had a clear trigger for sleep-wake rhythm disorder onset than cases in the primary CRSD group; and (iv) the types of sleep-wake rhythm disorders in the primary CRSD group consisted of delayed sleep phase syndrome (DSPS), 72 (83.7%), non-24 pattern, 11 (12.8%), and irregular, 3 (3.5%). In the secondary CRSD group there were 25 (62.5%) cases of DSPS pattern, 1 (2.5%) of non-24 pattern and 14 (35.0%) with irregular pattern. The 56 (65.1%) cases with primary CRSD showed good response to vitamin B12 and bright light therapy; however, 28 (70.0%) cases with secondary CRSD did not respond to such therapies.

Yanagihara, M., et al. (2014). "The melatonin receptor agonist is effective for free-running type circadian rhythm sleep disorder: case report on two sighted patients." Tohoku J Exp Med 234(2): 123-128.
	Along with urbanization of the living environment, the number of patients with circadian rhythm sleep disorder (CRSD) has been increasing. There are several treatment candidates for CRSD, such as light therapy, drugs (melatonin and vitamin B12), and sleep hygiene education. However, successful treatment method has not been established. In free-running type (FRT) CRSD, the endogenous circadian rhythm cannot be entrained to the 24-h light-dark cycle, resulting in free running on a cycle 0.5-2.5 h longer than the 24-h period. This condition is relatively common in blind individuals and is unusual in sighted individuals. Here we report two sighted patients with FRT, successfully treated with a melatonin receptor agonist, ramelteon. Patient 1 (36-year-old female) had suffered from FRT for nearly 4 months after resigning her job. She was given sleep hygiene education together with ramelteon at first and the free-running cycle stopped after treatment day 15. Triazolam was added from the day 25 to promote earlier sleep onset. And the sleep-wake schedule was normalized by the day 34. Patient 2 (33-year-old male) had suffered from FRT for nearly 8 months after starting to take a leave of absence from his job. He was given sleep hygiene education and was treated with ramelteon and methylcobalamin. His sleep-wake schedule was normalized from the first treatment day. By the combined treatment with ramelteon, both patients have maintained favorable sleep-wake schedules. The agonist action of ramelteon at the melatonin 2 receptor may have primarily contributed to the cessation of the free-running cycle in these patients.

Yennurajalingam, S., et al. (2021). "Sleep disturbance in patients with cancer: a feasibility study of multimodal therapy." BMJ Support Palliat Care 11(2): 170-179.
	BACKGROUND: Our aim was to determine feasibility and effect sizes of bright light therapy (BLT), melatonin (MLT), methylphenidate (MP) and eight combinations (BLT+MLT+MP, BLT+MLT, BLT+MP, BLT alone, MLT+MP, MLT alone, MP alone, placebo for BLT, MLT and MP) defined as multimodal therapy (MMT), to improve sleep quality (SQ) (Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI)) from baseline to day 15. We also examined the effects of MMT on insomnia, fatigue, depression, quality of life and actigraphy. METHODS: Patients with advanced cancer with poor SQ (PSQI ≥5) were eligible. Using a double-blind randomised factorial study design, patients were randomised into 1 of the 8 arms for 2 weeks. Feasibility and effect sizes were assessed. RESULTS: 81% (54/67) of randomised patients completed the study. There were no differences in the demographics and SQ between groups. The adherence rates for BLT, MLT and MP were 93%, 100% and 100%, respectively. BLT+MLT+placebo of MP; BLT+placebo of MLT+placebo of MP; BLT+MLT+MP showed an effect size (Cohen's d) for change in PSQI scores of 0.64, 0.57 and 0.63, respectively. PSQI change using linear regression showed BLT (n=29) has effect size of 0.46, p=0.017; MLT (n=26), 0.24, p=0.20; MP (n=26), 0.06, p=0.46. No significant differences were observed in scores for insomnia, fatigue, depression, quality of life and actigraphy. There were no differences in adverse events by groups(p=0.80). CONCLUSIONS: The use of MMT to treat SQ disturbance was feasible. BLT+MLT showed the most promising effect size in improvement in SQ, and additional larger studies are needed. TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT01628029.

Youngstedt, S. D., et al. (2022). "Bright Light Treatment of Combat-related PTSD: A Randomized Controlled Trial." Mil Med 187(3-4): e435-e444.
	INTRODUCTION: Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a prevalent consequence of combat with significant associated morbidity. Available treatments for PTSD have had limitations, suggesting a need to explore alternative or adjuvant treatments. Numerous rationales for bright light treatment of PTSD include its benefits for common PTSD comorbidities of depression, anxiety, and circadian misalignment and its relative ease of use with few side effects. The primary aims of this research were to examine the effects of bright light treatment for combat-related PTSD and associated morbidity. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A randomized controlled trial was performed in N = 69 veterans with PTSD attributable to combat in Afghanistan and/or Iraq. Following a 1-week baseline, participants were randomized to 4 weeks of daily morning bright light treatment (10,000 lux for 30 min/day) or a control treatment (inactivated negative ion generator). At baseline and at the end of treatment, participants were rated blindly on the Clinician Assessed PTSD Scale (CAPS), the Clinical Global Impressions Scale (CGI), and the Hamilton Depression Scale and rated themselves on the PTSD Checklist-Military (PCL-M). Following baseline and each treatment week, participants completed self-reported scales of state anxiety, depression, and sleep, and sleep and the circadian rhythm of wrist activity were also assessed with wrist actigraphy. RESULTS: Compared with the control treatment, bright light elicited significantly greater improvements in the CAPS and CGI-Improvement. The bright light also elicited a significantly greater rate of treatment response (reduction ≥33%) for the CAPS (44.1% vs. 8.6%) and PCL-M (33% vs. 6%), but no participant had remission from PTSD. Changes in depression, anxiety, and sleep did not differ between treatments. Improvement in CAPS was significantly correlated with a phase advance of the circadian rhythm of wrist activity. CONCLUSIONS: The most comprehensive study on the topic to date indicated significant short-term efficacy of bright light treatment on the primary variables (CAPS and CGI) with clinical relevance (i.e., treatment response) in veterans with chronic PTSD who did not report extremely high habitual light exposure. No significant effects were found for anxiety, depression, or sleep disturbance. Further research is warranted, particularly exploration of circadian phase-shifting mechanisms of bright light for PTSD.

Yu, S., et al. (2021). "Abnormalities in Cutaneous Microcirculation in Patients with Alzheimer's Disease, Mild Cognitive Impairment, and Chronic Insomnia Disorder." J Clin Med 10(24).
	Impaired sympathetic response is frequently observed in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). On the other hand, chronic insomnia disorder (CID) is also often accompanied by activation of sympathetic nerves. Considering that cutaneous microcirculation reflects sympathetic tone, we hypothesized that baseline cutaneous microcirculation in fingers, as detected by laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF), differs among patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), AD, and CID. As light therapy is one of the adjunctive treatments for AD and CID, we designed a randomized controlled cross-over trial of light therapy through eyes for 12 weeks with red light as treatment and green light as control limb, and examined if light therapy has an impact on cutaneous microcirculation. Before light therapy, patients with AD had significantly lower baseline cutaneous perfusion than those with CID in left and right first to fourth fingers. After red light therapy, however, cutaneous perfusion of fingers in CID patients significantly decreased (right fingers, before vs. after = 227.25 ± 62.00 vs. 162.00 ± 49.34, p = 0.007; left fingers, before vs. after = 228.99 ± 58.80 vs. 177.41 ± 59.41, p = 0.003) while cutaneous perfusion of fingers in CID patients did not significantly change after green light therapy. Light therapy with red light also significantly increased cutaneous finger perfusion in patients with AD (right fingers, before vs. after = 130.13 ± 49.82 vs. 172.38 ± 38.32, p = 0.043). Our results suggest that cutaneous perfusion is a useful tool to detect sympathetic dysfunction in patients with CID and AD, and that light therapy with red light is a potential therapeutic intervention to reverse impaired sympathetic function in patients with CID and patients with AD.

Yuen, H. K. and M. A. Cunningham (2014). "Optimal management of fatigue in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus: a systematic review." Ther Clin Risk Manag 10: 775-786.
	Among the host of distressing pathophysiological and psychosocial symptoms, fatigue is the most prevalent complaint in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). This review is to update the current findings on non-pharmacological, pharmacological, and modality strategies to manage fatigue in patients with SLE and to provide some recommendations on optimal management of fatigue based on the best available evidence. We performed a systematic literature search of the PubMed and Scopus databases to identify publications on fatigue management in patients with SLE. Based on the studies reported in the literature, we identified nine intervention strategies that have the potential to alleviate fatigue in patients with SLE. Of the nine strategies, aerobic exercise and belimumab seem to have the strongest evidence of treatment efficacy. N-acetylcysteine and ultraviolet-A1 phototherapy demonstrated low-to-moderate levels of evidence. Psychosocial interventions, dietary manipulation (low calorie or glycemic index diet) aiming for weight loss, vitamin D supplementation, and acupuncture all had weak evidence. Dehydroepiandrosterone is not recommended due to a lack of evidence for its efficacy. In addition to taking treatment efficacy and side effects into consideration, clinicians should consider factors such as cost of treatment, commitments, and burden to the patient when selecting fatigue management strategies for patients with SLE. Any comorbidities, such as psychological distress, chronic pain, sleep disturbance, obesity, or hypovitaminosis D, associated with fatigue should be addressed.

Zawilska, J. B., et al. (2010). "[Nighttime eating disorders--clinical symptoms and treatment]." Przegl Lek 67(7): 536-540.
	Nighttime eating is categorized as either night eating syndrome (NES) or the sleep-related eating disorder (SRED). Both diseases are often connected with an increase of the body mass, obesity, and with psychiatric disturbances. NES is characterized by evening hyperphagia, abnormally increased food intake after the evening meal, nocturnal awakings with ingestions, morning anorexia, and insomnia. Patients suffering from NES are aware of their nocturnal ingestions. It is suggested that NES is an abnormality in the circadian rhythm of meal timing that occurs in people with normal circadian rhythm of sleep. Other factors underlying NES include genetic predispositions, hormonal and neurochemical disturbances, and mood disorders. SRED is characterized by recurrent episodes of eating or drinking after arousal from nighttime sleep, unaware in tight the most cases, with adverse consequences. The distinctive features of SRED are amnesia of night eating episodes and consumption of non-typical food or dangerous articles. SRED is frequently associated with other sleep disorders, e.g., restless leg syndrome, periodic limb movement disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, and somnambulism. It can be also induced by medicines applied by a patient (e.g. zolpidem). It is hypothesized that the syndrome represents a variation of somnambulism. In the treatment of NES both non-pharmacological methods (psychotherapy, phototherapy) as well as the pharmacotherapy (aimed to increase serotoninergic neurotransmission in the brain, predominantly by sertraline, a selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor) are used. SRED can be treated by controlling comorbid sleep disorders and eliminating provocative sedative hypnotics.

Zeitzer, J. M., et al. (2011). "Effectiveness of evening phototherapy for insomnia is reduced by bright daytime light exposure." Sleep Med 12(8): 805-807.
	OBJECTIVE: To examine the effect of ambulatory daytime light exposure on phase delays and on the advances produced by timed exposure to bright evening or morning light. METHODS: As a subset of a larger study, 32 older (63.0 ± 6.43 years) adults with primary insomnia were randomized to an at-home, single-blind, 12-week, parallel-group study entailing daily exposure to 45 min of scheduled evening or morning bright (∼4000 lux) light. Light exposure patterns during the baseline and the last week of treatment were monitored using actigraphs with built-in illuminance detectors. Circadian phase was determined through analysis of in-laboratory collected plasma melatonin. RESULTS: Less daytime light exposure during the last week of treatment was significantly associated with larger phase delays in response to evening light (r's>0.78). Less daytime light exposure during the last week of treatment was also associated with a significant delay in wake time (r's>-0.75). There were no such relationships between light exposure history and phase advances in response to morning light. CONCLUSIONS: Greater light exposure during the daytime may decrease the ability of evening light, but not morning light, exposure to engender meaningful changes of circadian phase.

Zhang, M., et al. (2023). "Light Therapy to Improve Sleep Quality in Older Adults Living in Residential Long-Term Care: A Systematic Review." J Am Med Dir Assoc 24(1): 65-74.e61.
	OBJECTIVES: Because light can regulate sleep rhythms, numerous studies have investigated whether light therapy can improve sleep disorders in older people, but its efficacy remains controversial. Therefore, this systematic review aimed to examine and summarize current evidence about the efficacy of light therapy to improve sleep for older people in residential long-term care. DESIGN: Systematic review. SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Older people living in long-term care settings. METHODS: Systematic searches were conducted in the databases PubMed, Web of Science, Cochrane, EMBASE, CINAHL, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, China Science and Technology Journal Database, WanFang, Chinese Biomedical Literature Database, and in reference lists within relevant articles. Studies were eligible for inclusion if they evaluated light therapy for older people with sleep disorders in long-term care settings. RESULTS: This systematic review includes 21 articles, summarizing light therapy with different durations and intensities. The light intervention was typically administered between 7:00 and 12:00 am for 30-120 minutes. The interventions lasted from 1 week to several months, and the intensity of the light intervention usually ranged from 2500 to 10,000 lux. Short-term exposure (30-60 minutes) with high light levels (≥10,000 lux), relatively long-term exposure (1-2 hours) with moderate light levels (2500-10,000 lux), or long-term exposure (1-4 hours or full day) with low light levels (≤2500 lux) were associated with improved sleep indicators for older people in long-term care settings. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The efficacy of light therapy in long-term care settings may be affected by the duration of exposure, time and length of intervention, intensity of light, and equipment used to administer the therapy. Further research must be conducted to optimize light therapy parameters. Large, high-quality randomized controlled trials are needed to deepen our understanding of the effects of light therapy on sleep in older people living in long-term care settings.

Zhao, J., et al. (2012). "Red light and the sleep quality and endurance performance of Chinese female basketball players." J Athl Train 47(6): 673-678.
	CONTEXT: Good sleep is an important recovery method for prevention and treatment of overtraining in sport practice. Whether sleep is regulated by melatonin after red-light irradiation in athletes is unknown. OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of red light on sleep quality and endurance performance of Chinese female basketball players. DESIGN: Cohort study. SETTING: Athletic training facility of the Chinese People's Liberation Army and research laboratory of the China Institute of Sport Science. Patients or Other Participants: Twenty athletes of the Chinese People's Liberation Army team (age = 18.60 6 3.60 years) took part in the study. Participants were divided into red-light treatment (n = 10) and placebo (n = 10) groups. INTERVENTION(S): The red-light treatment participants received 30 minutes of irradiation from a red-light therapy instrument every night for 14 days. The placebo group did not receive light illumination. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) questionnaire was completed, serum melatonin was assessed, and 12-minute run was performed at preintervention (baseline) and postintervention (14 days). RESULTS: The 14-day whole-body irradiation with red-light treatment improved the sleep, serum melatonin level, and endurance performance of the elite female basketball players (P < .05). We found a correlation between changes in global Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index and serum melatonin levels (r = -0.695, P = .006). CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirmed the effectiveness of body irradiation with red light in improving the quality of sleep of elite female basketball players and offered a nonpharmacologic and noninvasive therapy to prevent sleep disorders after training.

Zhao, X., et al. (2022). "Brain Photobiomodulation Improves Sleep Quality in Subjective Cognitive Decline: A Randomized, Sham-Controlled Study." J Alzheimers Dis 87(4): 1581-1589.
	BACKGROUND: Sleep appears to be a sensitive biomarker that facilitates early detection and effective intervention for Alzheimer's disease, while subjective cognitive decline (SCD) is a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. Prefrontal cortex atrophy is associated with both sleep disruption and cognitive decline. Transcranial brain photobiomodulation (PBM) therapy can enhance frontal cortex oxygen consumption, increasing frontal cortex mediated memory function. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to test whether PBM therapy targeting the frontal cortex could improve sleep and cognitive function in SCD. METHODS: Fifty-eight SCDs were divided into the PBM group (N = 32) in which real light therapy was administered and a sham light therapy group (N = 26). All the participants received either real light or sham light therapy for 6 days consecutively, while the sleep data were recorded. The n-back task was employed to measure each participant's working memory. RESULTS: We found no differences in sleep efficiency change (F = 211, p = 0.279), REM stage percent change (F = 420, p = 0.91), and wake-up time (F = 212, p = 0.277) between the two groups. The sleep efficiency and REM were improved within the true light group on the fifth day. The true light group perform better than the control group in the n-back test, the accuracy was higher in the 2-back test (88.6% versus 79.6%, p = 0.001), and the reaction time in 1-back was shorter (544.80±202.00 versus 592.87±222.05, p = 0.003). CONCLUSION: After five days of PBM therapy targeting the prefrontal cortex, sleep efficiency and N-back cognitive performance were improved on the fifth day.

Zhao, X. and P. Wong (2016). "Managing Sleep Disturbances in Cirrhosis." Scientifica (Cairo) 2016: 6576812.
	Sleep disturbances, particularly daytime sleepiness and insomnia, are common problems reported by patients suffering from liver cirrhosis. Poor sleep negatively impacts patients' quality of life and cognitive functions and increases mortality. Although sleep disturbances can be an early sign of hepatic encephalopathy (HE), many patients without HE still complain of poor quality sleep. The pathophysiology of these disturbances is not fully understood but is believed to be linked to impaired hepatic melatonin metabolism. This paper provides an overview for the clinician of common comorbidities contributing to poor sleep in patients with liver disease, mainly restless leg syndrome and obstructive sleep apnea. It discusses nondrug and pharmacologic treatment options in these patients, such as the use of light therapy and histamine (H1) blockers.